Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI) is a graduate-level, research-based academic institution that is located in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.

The university was established in 2019, and offers programs in Artificial Intelligence field for both local and international students. The establishment of MBZUAI is part of the United Arab Emirates strategy for Artificial Intelligence 2031, for which came the appointment of the world's first Minister of State for Artificial Intelligence.

The university will provide admitted students with a full scholarship, including benefits such as a monthly allowance, health insurance, and accommodation.  The university will secure internships by working with local and global companies. The initial class of graduate students were slated to start coursework in September 2020, but due to the COVID-19 pandemic coursework began in January 2021.

Academics
MBZUAI seeks to empower a new generation of AI leaders through exceptional education and a unique model of academia. The University offers graduate level students a range of postgraduate degrees, focusing on core components of the AI industry: Computer Vision, Machine Learning, and Natural Language Processing. MBZUAI offers graduate level degrees that are research intensive and focused on practical AI.The university has the following programs:

 PhD 
 Computer Vision (PhD)
 Machine Learning (PhD)
 Natural Language Processing (PhD)

 MSc 
 Computer Vision (MSc)
 Machine Learning (MSc)
 Natural Language Processing (MSc)

Professional Services
MBZUAI provides consulting and support services  to address specific needs and challenges. These include feasibility studies, benchmarks and assessments, business processes enhancement, and specific expert guidance and mentoring for AI startups.

Furthermore, MBZUAI offers training services  such as introductory and bespoke courses, which provide orientation and knowledge of AI where attendees learn about AI's impact on business and how it can enhance business operations.

Research
The university serves as a hub for AI research and education and aims to be an epicenter of AI innovation by finding solutions to the world's most pressing challenges. Moreover, as a new institution, the university's ambition is to become the go-to place for government and enterprises when seeking AI expertise, solutions or advice.

Research focuses on the following themes:

 Services and Quality of Life.
 Industrial and Manufacturing Technologies.
 Future Game Changers.
 Sustainability of Vital Resources and Environment.