Tzvi Freeman is a Canadian rabbi associated with the Chabad-Lubavitch Hasidic movement. Freeman is known for his work as a writer and editor for Chabad.org, his book Bringing Heaven Down to Earth, as well as his other writings and teachings. Freeman primarily bases his thoughts on the teachings of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the seventh Rebbe of the Chabad movement.

Personal life
Freeman was born in Vancouver, Canada, and became involved in New Age spirituality and practices before joining the Chabad movement in the mid-1970s. Prior to his writing career, Freeman taught Game Design and Documentation at the Digipen School of Computer Gaming in Vancouver, Canada,Freeman, T. (1997). Game Design Defined. Game Developer APRIL-MAY 1997. and worked as a game designer for Sunburst Software on the A to Zap! educational video game.A to zap! [electronic resource]. Concept and design by Tzvi Freeman; project manager, Debra Weinberger. Pleasantville, NY: Sunburst Communications, 1995.

Publications
 Bringing Heaven Down to Earth: 365 Meditations from the Teachings of the Rebbe, Menachem Mendel Schneerson (1996)
 Men Women & Kabala: Ancient Wisdom & Practical Advice (1999)
 Heaven Exposed (2004)
 The Book of Purpose (2004)
 Trembling with Joy: 18 Paths of Joyous Life from the Baal Shem Tov (2011)
 Be Within, Stay Above: Meditation from the Wisdom of the Rebbe (2000)
 The Hyper-Modern Ancient With-It Traditional Haggadah (2013)

 Views 
Freeman's views on the debate over the definition of Jews and Judaism goes beyond the conventional theological stance of Orthodoxy, with Freeman stating that "Judaism is not a religion." Freeman calls the notion a "modern invention" and offers a Jewish mystical view of the Jews as a single soul or body formed of the collective of Jewish individuals, where the sin of one individual is in fact the sin of the collective. For Freeman, Judaism cannot be defined as a religion as that would imply a religion of seperate individuals.Gold, S. J. (2010). The role of the Jewish People on earth. Ivri: The Essence of Hebrew Spirituality. Similarly, although Freeman is a leading voice in the Chabad movement, he describes himself as an "un-Orthodox rabbi," as he views Hasidism as a guide to the spiritual life.

Freeman views the timing of the Bar and bat mitzvah rituals within Judaism as both biologically and existentially significant. The rituals, which takes place around the onset of puberty, are, according to Freeman, are also linked to the increase of "internal diologue" and "reflective consciousness" in the young adolescent which Freeman sees are a requirement for the newfound responsiblity of the bar and bat mitzvah initiate.Freeman, T. (2017). The Blossoming of Human Consciousness in Halakhah and Kabbalah. B'Or Ha'Torah, Vol. 24, pp. 189-208.