If This Then That (commonly known as IFTTT, ) is a web-based service that allows users to create chains of conditional statements 
triggered by changes that occur within other web services such as Gmail, Facebook, Telegram, Instagram, or Pinterest.
The service is offered in freeware, subscription, and enterprise versions.

The conditional chains are called applets. 
An applet may for example send an e-mail message if the user tweets using a hashtag, or copy a photo on Facebook to a user's archive if someone tags a user in a photo.

In addition to the web-based application, the service runs on iOS and Android. In February 2015, IFTTT renamed its original application to IF, and released a new suite of apps called Do, with which users can create shortcut applications and actions. As of 2015, IFTTT users created about 20 million recipes each day. All of the functionalities of the Do suite of apps have since been integrated into a redesigned IFTTT app.

 History 
On December 14, 2010, Linden Tibbets, the co-founder of IFTTT, posted a blog post titled “ifttt the beginning...” on the IFTTT website, announcing the new project. The first IFTTT applications were designed and developed by Tibbets and co-founder Jesse Tane and the product officially launched on September 7, 2011.

By April 2012, users had created one million tasks. In June 2012, the service entered the Internet of Things space by integrating with Belkin Wemo devices, allowing applets to interact with the physical world. In July 2013, IFTTT released an iPhone app and later released a version for iPad and iPod touch. Then in April 2014, an Android version came out. By the end of 2014, the IFTTT business was valued at approximately US$170 million.

On February 19, 2015, IFTTT launched three new applications. Do Button triggers an action when you press it. Do Camera automatically uploads the image to the service of your choice (Facebook, Twitter, Dropbox, etc). Do Notes does the same as Do Camera except with notes instead of images. In November 2016, the four apps were merged. By December 2016, the company announced a partnership with JotForm to integrate an applet to create actions in other applications.

Part of the revenue of IFTTT comes from "IFTTT Platform" partners, who pay to have their products connected to the service.

On September 10, 2020, the service switched to a limited freemium model with a subscription-based version known as "IFTTT Pro", which allows services to use conditional statements and query data for more complex tasks. At the same time, all existing users were limited to three custom applets, being required to subscribe to Pro in order to remove this limitation. This generated criticism from its users due to this paywall.

 Features 
 Overview 
right|Screenshot of the IFTTT website
IFTTT employs the following concepts:
 Services (formerly known as channels) are the basic building blocks of IFTTT. They mainly describe a series of data from a certain web service such as YouTube or eBay. Services can also describe actions controlled with certain APIs, like SMS. Sometimes, they can represent information in terms of weather or stocks. Each service has a particular set of triggers and actions.
 Triggers are the "this" part of an applet. They are the items that trigger the action. For example, from an RSS feed, you can receive a notification based on a keyword or phrase.
 Actions are the "that" part of an applet. They are the output that results from the input of the trigger.
 Applets (formerly known as recipes) are the predicates made from Triggers and Actions. For example, if you like a picture on Instagram (trigger), an IFTTT app can send the photo to your Dropbox account (action).
 Ingredients are basic data available from a trigger—from the email trigger, for example; subject, body, attachment, received date, and sender’s address.

 Usage examples 
 IFTTT can automate web-application tasks, such as posting the same content on several social networks.
 Marketing professionals can use IFTTT to track mentions of companies in RSS feeds.
 IFTTT also is used in home automation, for instance switching on a light when detecting motion in a room (with associated compliant devices).

 Reception 
IFTTT has been received positively by Forbes, Time, Wired, The New York Times, and Reader's Digest. Microsoft developed a similar product called Microsoft Flow (later renamed Microsoft Power Automate).