Mujib Year () is the year declared to celebrate on the occasion of the centennial birth anniversary of the founding leader of Bangladesh, Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. The Government of Bangladesh has declared the year 2020-21 as the Mujib Year. This year will be celebrated from March 17, 2020, to December 16, 2021 (extended to 9 months, from 17 March 2021 to 16 December 2021). Mujib was born on March 17 1920, in East Bengal (now in Tungipara village of Gopalganj district of Bangladesh).

Again, on March 26, 2021, Bangladesh will mark the half-centenary of its independence. The announcement of the year 1971 is particularly important as Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was actively involved in Bangladesh's struggle for independence.

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit to Bangladesh was cancelled after Bangladesh decided to avoid mass-scale celebrations on March 17 following the detection of three cases of coronavirus affected. Modi will join the birth centenary celebration of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman on March 17 through video conference. Later All public gathering and Occasions were declared to be postponed due to coronavirus.

Following the global coronavirus outbreak and the identification of infected patients in Bangladesh, on March 8, the Government of Bangladesh and the National Implementation Committee to Celebrate the Birth Centenary announced a small pre-March event in the public interest and public welfare. At the same time, it was announced that the visit of the invited heads of state of different countries has also been canceled.

 Global Celebration 
The UN General Assembly, UNESCO, has decided to jointly celebrate the Mujib Year with Bangladesh at the UNESCO 40th General Assembly. The decision was made in the presence of all UNESCO members on November 12–27 in Paris, held on November 25,2019.

Washington DC Mayor Muriel Bowser has issued a proclamation about Mujib year. In the proclamation he has declared Mujib Year from March 17, 2020, to September 30, 2020, marking the birth centenary celebration of Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.

 Program 
In addition to promoting the role of Bangabandhu at the grassroots level in Bangladesh's independence struggle, the return anniversary of Bangabandhu, the founding anniversary of the Awami League, National Mourning Day and Jail Killing Day will be celebrated every year as well. There are also plans to produce short films and documentaries to celebrate the birth anniversary and Mujib anniversary. Chief coordinator of the program is Kamal Chowdhury.