 is a Japanese original net animation anime series produced by Sunrise Beyond. A sequel to the 2018 anime Gundam Build Divers, it is the first Gundam series to be released in the Reiwa period, released to celebrate the franchise's 40th anniversary. The series is directed by Shinya Watada and written by Yasuyuki Muto. Initially announced at the Gundam 40th anniversary video, the series aired on its Gundam Channel streaming service in Japan from October 10 to December 26, 2019. A TV airing of the ONA began on Tokyo MX and later in BS11 on October 12, 2019 as part of the Anime+ lineup.  A second season premiered on April 9, 2020 and ended on August 27, 2020. Two spinoffs of the series were later serialized in Kadokawa's Gundam Ace magazine and Hobby Japan.

Plot
Two years has passed since the EL-Diver Incident, an event that almost destroyed the Gundam Battle Nexus Online Game until it was resolved by the force group known as "Build Divers". In order to make the game secure, a newer version of the game was rolled out in order to prevent the same incident from happening again and with newer experiences that would make the gameplay more immersive to players. The story focuses on Hiroto Kuga, a high schooler who is a rogue mercenary diver for hire, who goes in the game being hired by other forces and divers without being affiliated with anyone. Despite his solo diver status he always wanders alone in game, yearning for a mysterious girl from his past. But after a special request mission, Hiroto is united with three other active divers in a strange world named "Eldora" and forms the Force group "BUILD DiVERS" in what appears to be just another GBN gamespace event, until they learn the truth about Eldora and its consequences not only for GBN, but for the entire world.

Characters
BUILD DiVERS
 / 

A teenage build diver and a former member of the Force group Avalon, who lives in Yokohama. Now known as a rogue diver for hire after leaving Avalon, he wanders the GBN gamespace alone. He is very calm and a man of few words, usually refusing others' reward and help, especially on joining other forces. But when a special mission done by Freddie united him with Kazami, May and Parviz, they accidentally formed the force group named "BUILD DiVERS" to protect the Eldorans from the One-Eyes army.
Hiroto uses the PFF-X7 Core Gundam as his main Gunpla, based on the RX-78-2 Gundam from the original Mobile Suit Gundam series. Its special armament system called "Planets System", allows the Core Gundam to be equipped with various types of armor, each for a different situation. Hiroto later upgrades his Gunpla into the PFF-X7II Core Gundam II. This new Core Gundam can transform into the "Core Flyer", in a similar fashion to the original Gundam's FF-X7 Core Fighter for increased mobility and like its predecessor, it can also use the Planets System:
Earth Armor (PFF-X7/E3 Earthree Gundam): Core Gundam's default, blueish all-around armor.
Mars Armor (PFF-X7/M4 MarsFour Gundam): A red armor whose focus is close quarters combat.
Venus Armor (PFF-X7/V2 VeeTwo Gundam): A green armor whose focus is ranged combat.
Mercury Armor (PFF-X7/M1 MercuOne Gundam): A dark blue armor whose focus is underwater combat.
Jupiter Armor (PFF-X7/J5 Jupitive Gundam): A white armor whose focus is orbital combat.
Uranus Armor (PFF-X7II/U7 Uraven Gundam): An indigo armor focused on reconnaissance and sniping.
Saturn Armor (PFF-X7II/S6 Saturnix Gundam): An orange armor focused in close combat without beam weapons, originally developed to counter Gundam Frames.
Neptune Armor (PFF-X7II/N8 Nepteight Gundam): A mint-colored armor equipped with the Volture Lumiere system from Mobile Suit Gundam SEED C.E. 73: Stargazer, but was used for launching into orbit instead of maneuvering in deep space.
PFF-X7II/BUILD DiVERS Re:Rising Gundam: A special combination of the Core Gundam II with the WoDom Pod + and parts from the Gundam Aegis Knight and the EX Valkylander, armed with the Grand Cross Cannon.
In one occasion, Hiroto changes his avatar to a Haro to pilot the Mobile Builder Haro Loader to help with the repairs on Cuadorn. During the Gunpla Battle Royal, he pilots an unmodified ASW-G-08 Gundam Barbatos Lupus Rex from Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans.

A female diver who prefers to play solo, she is a very calm and no-nonsense girl whose interest is in battles alone. However, she is not a fan on those that clash their opponents head on and prefers to implement a strategic approach. Later in the series, she is revealed to be one of the 87 EL-Divers who were saved after the EL-Diver incident two years ago and was given her own Mobile Doll body similar to Sarah. In the final episode, she is revealed to be created from the remnant data originating from Eve, another EL-Diver Hiroto met a few years ago and carries her earring on her armband.
May uses the JMA0530-MAY WoDom Pod as her main Gunpla, which is a customized JMA-0530 Walking Dome from Turn A Gundam. In the later episodes, the mobile suit is revealed to be a disguise for its true form, the HER-SELF Mobile Doll May. May later upgrades her WoDom Pod into the JMA0530-MAYBD WoDom Pod +. During the Gunpla Battle Royal, she uses her Mobile Doll (albeit with a new color scheme) along with an unmodified NZ-999 II Neo Zeong mobile armor from Mobile Suit Gundam Narrative.

 / 

A diver who was a former member of the diver group "Mu Dish". He is a very energetic diver who fancies himself as a hero and seeks to make a name for himself in GBN. Though he enjoys the game, he also has been a long fan of the G-TUBER Captain Zeon on his success in several battles, but this obsession drove his former teammates to losing and soon left the group. It was at that time he met Hiroto and the others to form the new BUILD DiVERS group to prove his sense of justice. In real life, Kazami is a teenager with a scrawny body and the son of a fisherman.
Kazami uses ZGMF-X19AK Gundam Justice Knight as his main Gunpla, which is a ZGMF-X19A Infinite Justice from Mobile Suit Gundam SEED Destiny customized with knight motif and limited armament. He also possesses a modified Petit'gguy called the Justi'gguy. Kazami later uses the GAT-X303K Gundam Aegis Knight as his main Gunpla, inspired from the GAT-X303 Aegis Gundam from Mobile Suit Gundam SEED, which is also customized with knight motif and limited armament, especially its larger shield that can combine with its other weapons to form a large beam sword, the "Keraunos Hyper Beam Sword", when it assumes "King Mode" and a transformable Assault Mode similar to the original Aegis.  During the Gunpla Battle Royal, he pilots an unmodified ZGMF-X42S Destiny Gundam also from SEED Destiny.

 / 

A novice diver whose avatar has fox-like features, he is the younger brother of Shahryar, one of the characters of the original series. He usually takes on playing the game after taking advice from his older brother, but due to his shy and often timid personality, he had problems making friends. In real life, Patrick is a wheelchair-bound teenager and is also a foreigner from a wealthy Middle Eastern family, just like his brother. He was left paralyzed after his glider crashed in the middle of a storm; said incident caused him to have a fear of heights.
Parviz uses the Valkylander, which he nicknamed "Morgiana", as his main Gunpla, a customized Super Deformed GNY-001F Gundam Astraea Type-F with elements from the Gundlander series in which first appears as a dragon and can transform into its SD Mobile Suit form when in battle. On some occasions, it carries the "Avalanche Rex Buster", a cannon which can also combine with the Gunpla itself. It also has its own version of the Trans-Am system from the 00 series called "Gundrans-Am". Parviz later upgrades his Gunpla into the EX Valkylander, based on the GNY-001 Gundam Astraea and its design elements based on the Sacred Beast Cuadorn. In one occasion, Parviz changes his avatar to a Haro to pilot the Mobile Builder Haro Fitter to help with the repairs on Cuadorn. During the Gunpla Battle Royal, he pilots an unmodified version of the XXXG-00W0 Wing Gundam Zero from Gundam Wing: Endless Waltz.

People of Eldora

A preteen anthropomorphized dog boy who lived on Planet Eldora, considered to be one of the "New People" after the departure of the Ancients eons ago. He is very cheerful and shows a lot of respect to the BUILD DiVERS, often calling them Creators. He is also the one who can summon them through the temples left behind by the Ancients.

An adult anthropomorphized cat girl who lives on Eldora. She is the older sister of Freddie, who is very wary about the BUILD DiVERS's appearance in their village. She usually has a strong sense of justice but doesn't get along with Kazami at times.

Maya's childhood friend. Stola wants to join the Eldora Resistance against the One-Eyes. After Alus fired the satellite cannon on the city of Seguri, he became one of the sole survivors of the event.

,  and 

Three Eldoran children in the mountain village, who are close friends with Freddie.

Freddie's father and the mayor of the mountain village in Eldora.

Hulun's Grandfather. An old Badger person who lives on farming in Freddie's village. Despite his grumpy personality and looks, he is a very influential person, among the people of the mountain.

Freddie and Maya's elder brother, and leader of a platoon in the Eldora Resistance. He dies alongside the residents of Seguri when Alus fires the  orbital cannon to obliterate the city.

The leader of the Eldora Resistance.

 and 

Two members of the Eldora Resistance, who survived the Satellite Cannon firing on Seguri alongside Stola. During the final episode, they come across a surviving Guard Eye unit and take it under their care.

A cat-like person, who is part of the Eldora Resistance. He has once known Masaki Shido when he first appeared in Eldora before Alus brainwashed him and turned him against his group. With him the surviving member of his division, he had developed a dislike towards the BUILD DiVERS, but slowly trusts them sooner and later. After Jed's death, he leads a new platoon for the Resistance to assist the BUILD DiVERS.

A giant biomechanical dragon that existed in the Legends of Eldora for centuries. Once created by the Ancients, he helped them with protecting Eldora from outside threats eons ago until they decided to depart from space to search for new planets to colonize. He soon fell into a deep sleep, watching over the "New People" that flourished the planet after the Ancients' departure. After Masaki stumbled into Eldora, he assisted him with fighting against the One-Eyes until it was injured. Since then, it took refuge in Milagg Mountain until it was awakened once more by Freddie and Parviz to help Hiroto and May repel back Alus's attack against them. Reluctant to accept the BUILD DiVERS' help at first, Cuadorn agrees to ally with them after realizing their will to protect their friends in Eldora. Cuadorn's wing is later restored with some spare Gunpla parts provided by Parviz. He and Masaki later assist the BUILD DiVERS in destroying Alus' satellite cannon and, upon its destruction, destroy its mainframe to prevent Alus from retreating back to Eldora. After the final battle, Cuadorn is seen with some New Eldorans on Milagg Mountain which was relocated in the crater where Seguri City once stood.

One-Eyes
 /  / 

A veteran S-Ranked Diver who May has been searching for since his disappearance. In real life, Masaki is bed-ridden at the city's general hospital after falling into a coma while logged in to GBN half a year prior to the events of the series. Later, it is revealed that he is brainwashed by the One-Eyes, becoming a masked man who served Alus and sided with them to terrorize Eldora. May recognized him as such despite his appearance in Eldora. However, his extended time in Eldora plus the brainwashing from the One-Eyes caused a serious deterioration on his real life self and his health condition. But due to the BUILD DiVERS' efforts, Masaki is freed from Alus' control and returns to his body back in the real world. With his sister's consent, Masaki returns to Eldora and teams up with Cuadorn again to assist the BUILD DiVERS in the final battle against Alus. He and Cuadorn later destroy the satellite cannon's mainframe to prevent Alus from returning to Eldora.
Masaki uses the MSF-007TE Gundam Tertium as his main Gunpla, a heavily customized MSF-007 Gundam Mark-III from Z-MSV. After being brainwashed by Alus, his Gunpla is converted into the MSF-007SS Gundam Seltsam equipped with the massive Seltsam Arm, which gives the Gunpla a demonic look while displaying massive strength. After Masaki is finally released from Alus's control, his Gunpla is converted into the Gundam Advanced Tertium, now equipped with the Tertium Arms for space combat.

The series's main antagonist, an Artificial Intelligence entity residing in Eldora's moon which was created by the Ancients to protect the planet from outside threats. After the Ancients left the ravaged planet after a long war, Alus entered into a long slumber. Once he reawakened, he mistook the current inhabitants of Eldora for invaders and started attacking them, using his vast knowledge and resources. After having his satellite cannon and mobile units destroyed by the BUILD DiVERS, he angrily decided to invade GBN as a last resort to destroy them, the game and all Divers in it. In the end, he and his entire fleet, alongside his mobile suits, were defeated and sank down by the BUILD DiVERS, the Third Coalition of Volunteers and many other Divers in GBN, with Alus being deleted by both Hiroto and Riku. After the final battle, he is reincarnated as an infant EL-Diver carrying a pendant resembling a Guard Eye.
Due to Alus's vast access to GBN through Masaki, he was able to create and build mechanical puppets based on Gunpla seen in GBN Online. In the second season, Alus develops the AGP-X1 Alus Core Gundam, a more powerful replica of Hiroto Kuga's Core Gundam with more upgraded specifications and weaponry to fight the BUILD DiVERS. It utilizes an armor system like the original Core Gundam's Planets System allowing it to be equipped with several armor made by Alus himself. 
AGP-X1/E3 Alus Earthree Gundam: An armor based on the Core Gundam's Earth Armor. A variant of this is created when Alus steals the original Earth Armor from Hiroto during the final battle against him.
AGP-X1/NU Fake ν Gundam: An armor based on the RX-93 ν Gundam from Mobile Suit Gundam: Char's Counterattack. 
Dubious Arche Gundam: An armor based on the GNW-20000 Arche Gundam from Mobile Suit Gundam 00. 
Reverse Turn X: An armor based on the CONCEPT-X 6-1-2 Turn X from Turn A Gundam.

The Guard Eyes are unmanned machines that pilot the larger, One-Eyes mecha. Guard Eyes are usually sent alone as scouts prior to their attacks on Eldoran settlements. In the final episode, one of them remains under the care of Calico and Zabun after Alus's downfall.

Third Coalition of Volunteers

A flamboyant veteran diver, affectionately referred to as "sis" and leader of the Force group "Adam's Apple". He serves as both a bartender and May's caretaker. Similar to the previous series, he uses the ZGMF-X20A-LP Gundam Love Phantom. During the Gunpla Battle Royal, he pilots an unmodified ASW-G-01 Gundam Bael from Mobile Suit Gundam: Iron-Blooded Orphans.

 / 

Parviz's older brother, he is leader of the Force group  and a veteran Diver, who is among the top two Gunpla builders in GBN. He was the one who convinced Parviz to join GBN after his little brother's accident. His main Gunpla is the GN-1001N Seravee Gundam Scheherazade.

 / 

A staff member of The Gundam Base Tokyo and younger sister of Koichi Nanase, one of the members of the original Build Divers. She appears in the series as May's bodyguard. During the final battle, she also uses her Diver avatar but is now equipped with a battle armor resembling the MA-04X Zakrello from Mobile Suit Gundam.

 / 

A high schooler and a female diver dressed as a kunoichi, she is a member of the original Build Divers. She pilots an upgraded version of her RX-零 RX-Zeromaru called the RX-零/覚醒 RX-Zeromaru (Shinki Kessho). During the Gunpla Battle Royal, she pilots an unmodified GNT-0000 00 Qan[T] from Mobile Suit Gundam 00 the Movie: A Wakening of the Trailblazer.

 / 

A member of the original Build Divers who also goes in the nickname , Koichi is a veteran Gunpla builder who builds rental units for The Gundam Base Tokyo and now works in the establishment prior to the first series. He is also responsible for the creation of the Build Decal System alongside the Mobile Doll with Tsukasa's help to allow EL-Divers to manifest into the real world. During the final battle against Alus, both him and Tsukasa piloted the MHF-01DR Lord Astray Double Rebake, a customized Lord Astray Z from Mobile Suit Gundam SEED ASTRAY Princess of the Sky which allowed both divers to pilot one mobile suit and is armed with two forms, each tailored to both divers' fighting styles. Koichi controls the Gunpla's Cuardo Mode. His other Gunpla is the RMS-117G11 Galbaldy Rebake which he pilots alone during the BUILD DiVERS' training match.

A former GP-Duelist who once had a grudge on GBN and was involved in the Break Decal Incident 2 years ago until he changed his ways. Alongside Koichi, they created the Build Decal System and the Mobile Doll system that allows EL-Divers to manifest into the real world. In GBN, his avatar, named Ansh, is of a purple Haro with a menacing look. During the final battle against Alus, both him and Koichi piloted the MHF-01DR Lord Astray Double Rebake, a customized Lord Astray Z from Mobile Suit Gundam SEED ASTRAY Princess of the Sky which allowed both divers to pilot one mobile suit and is armed with two forms, each tailored to both divers' fighting styles. Tsukasa control the Gunpla's Reverso Mode.

 / 

Leader of the Force group , where Hiroto was formerly affiliated with before he left the group 2 years ago. He appears in a special battle against Hiroto's team piloting the AGE-TRYMAG Gundam TRY AGE Magnum, which its design is inspired and based on the AGE series units from Mobile Suit Gundam AGE and utilizes the TRY-AGE system on its weaponry including the ability to use cards based on the Gundam AGE mobile suits for enhancements. During the Gunpla Battle Royal, he pilots an unmodified ZGMF-X20A Strike Freedom Gundam from Mobile Suit Gundam SEED Destiny equipped with the METEOR support system.

One of the two higher ranked members of Avalon, who is a close friend and former senior of Hiroto while he was affiliated with the group 2 years ago. He pilots the AGMF-X56S/l Impulse Gundam Lancier, a customised ZGMF-X56S Impulse Gundam, from the last few episodes of the previous series.

 / 

The leader of the original "Build Divers" on which the name of Hiroto's group have originated from. During Hiroto's time in Avalon, he was meant to shoot him down after a heated battle between him and Kyoya while Riku allied with Ogre. In the special battle against BUILD DiVERS, he used the GN-0000DVR/SM Gundam 00 Sky Moebius as his main Gunpla which is an upgraded Gundam 00 Sky with newer parts and weapons.

A member of the original "Build Divers" and one of the 87 EL-Divers who were saved after the EL-Diver incident two years ago. May met her during the day May was saved while introduced to the real world. Currently, Hiroto views her as Eve's possible younger sister. When in GBN, she uses the HER-SELF Mobile Doll Sarah for support during the battle against Alus's fleet.

Leader of Force group , he appeared in the series as one of the many divers who volunteered to train the BUILD DiVERS on their last mission in Eldora. He also gave some advice to Parviz regarding the strategy on Alus's units and their weaknesses. In the series, he uses the RX-78GP02R天 Gundam GP-Rase-Two-Ten as his main Gunpla, created after upgrading the Gundam GP-Rase-Two out of his own frustration on not being able to play GBN due to the server's downtime.

Ogre's younger brother and a member of Hyakki, he also appeared as part of the Coalition of Volunteers. He uses the GNX-803DG Do-ji GN-X as his main Gunpla, a combination of the GNX-803OG Ogre GN-X and the xvt-mmc Geara Ghirarga. In the final battle against Alus, he switched it out in favor of his old Gunpla, the xvt-mmc Geara Ghirarga.

 / 

Leader of Force group , whose avatar in the GBN world has the form of an ermine. In the series, he also has an alternate account going by the name of Captain Zeon, who is a famous G-Tuber and a veteran diver, who hosts his own show. Shown to be dressed in a red superhero outfit, he has a huge sense of justice and enthusiasm, which inspires Kazami to be his fan.
When Rommel is in his Captain Zeon persona, he uses the RX-93N04 ν-Zeon Gundam as his main Gunpla, created as a fusion of both Earth Federation and Zeon designs and focuses on both Close to Mid-Range combat. As himself, he pilots the GH-001RB Grimore Red Beret. During the Gunpla Battle Royal, he pilots an unmodified GF13-017NJII God Gundam from Mobile Fighter G Gundam as Captain Zeon.

A character of the spin-off manga Gundam Build Divers BREAK and a former Mass Diver. Being a rowdy person, he has an aggressive personality and speaks with a Kansai dialect. Before his force was formed, he was once a Mass Diver who used Break Decals provided by Tsukasa and enjoyed its corrupted powers despite the fact that it was breaking GBN. After the Break Decal incident, he changed his ways, formed the force group "ZA-∀Z" with his friend Zen and became part of the Coalition of Volunteers. In the final episode, he and Zen are present in the battle against Alus's invasion fleet.
Ark's main Gunpla is the GF13-017NJ/B Gundam Shining Break, a customized GF13-017NJ Shining Gundam from Mobile Fighter G Gundam which is given a flight form called "Shining Berkut" unlike its base model. Due to their fighting styles, both Ark and Zen can also execute a combination move named "Hard Improvisation".

A character of the spin-off manga Gundam Build Divers BREAK and also a former Mass Diver. Zen was a close friend of Ark, who like him, also has been using Break Decals for fun and enjoyment despite its corrupting nature. However after the Break Decal incident, he changed his ways, formed the force group "ZA-∀Z" with his friend and became part of the Coalition of Volunteers. In the final episode, he and Ark are present in the battle against Alus's invasion fleet.
Zen's main Gunpla is the YG-III Gundam G-Else, a customized YG-111 Gundam G-Self from Gundam Reconguista in G equipped with the Grow Up Units in both of its arms and legs for offensive and defensive situations. With his and Ark's fighting styles, they can both execute a combination move named "Hard Improvisation".

A character of the spin-off manga Gundam Build Divers BREAK. Rize is one of the 87 EL-Divers that appeared in GBN two years ago and also the last one to appear. He first appeared in front of the diver user Tetsu and due to his sudden appearance, he was given that name after the first word that appeared in his head, "Rise". After that, he is given a Gunpla as a body with the help from both Koichi Nanase and Tsukasa Shiba; however, his body for him to inhabit in the real world is not a Mobile Doll, but a Gunpla based on Hiroto's Core Gundam that Tetsu built after he saw it in the game and got impressed. His goal in the game is to surpass GBN's current champion, Kyoya Kujo. During the final battle against Alus, Rize assists the Coalition of Volunteers while protecting the Gaza Brothers after one of its members are down.
Rize's main Gunpla is the PFF-X7R Core Gundam [Rize], a replica of the original Core Gundam built by Tetsu as the main body of Rize to inhabit in the real world. Also due to how the Core Gundam Rize has a similar system to the Planets System, it can also be equipped with the Anima Armor in battle, turning it into the PFF-X7R/ANIMA Gundam Anima [Rize] and with the Aun[Rize] Armor that also turns it into the Gundam Aun [Rize].

 / 

The administrator of GBN who oversees its functioning. His avatar is based on a SD Gundam Force character Gundiver. In the final battle against Alus, both him and Miss Tori use a customized GunPanzer.

The developer and creator of GBN. Her avatar is based on the Crystal Phoenix from SD Sengokuden Densetsu no Daishogun.

Other Characters

A mysterious blonde girl who made friends with Hiroto a few years ago before the events of the story. Since her disappearance, Hiroto has been searching for her throughout the game. It is later revealed that she is one of the 87 EL-Divers that appeared in the game a few years ago. However, similar to her possible sister Sarah, her existence actually caused deadly bugs in the game. Before the events of the battle between the original Build Divers and the second Coalition of Volunteers, she pleaded Hiroto to mercifully delete her using the Core Gundam and promise to him that he will still be the same caring person to help others in need, especially her sister. Despite his pleas to stop her, she was deleted in front of Hiroto's eyes and out of existence. This incident affected Hiroto greatly, including him sparing Riku's life to save Sarah and leaving Avalon to become a rogue diver. In the final episode, May, another EL-Diver, is revealed to be created from the remnants of her lost data, sporting her earring on her armband.

Hiroto's classmate and childhood friend who lives next door and works at the same Gundam Base where he logs into GBN. She cares deeply about him and becomes worried upon learning that he is risking his life in a real war. In the final episode, she joins GBN as a new member of Hiroto's team and meets Freddie along with the New Eldorans.

Hiroto's father, who is a freelance writer. During the series, he suffers from writer's block and constantly forces himself to come up with stories by locking himself in his room. In the final episode, he manages to come up with at least one story regarding the phenomenal link between GBN and Eldora.

Hiroto's mother.

Manager of The Gundam Base Yokohama. Ken is a fan of Henken Bekkener from Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam, to the point of sporting the character's mustache. During the final battle against Alus, he pilots a Gunperry carrying multiple armors for the Core Gundam II and tanks a hit from Alus who had stolen Hiroto's Earthree armor and weapons for Hiroto.

Masaki's elder sister, who takes care of him in the hospital.

Production
The series was first teased back in the Gundam 40th Anniversary Beyond Press conference back on November 11, 2018. On July 5, 2019, Sunrise teased the new series in a preview during the 40th anniversary promotional video. and revealed the official title during the 2019 Japan Expo in Paris. Both Twitter and official websites also confirm the new series. In the official press conference held on July 31, 2019, Sunrise revealed more on the series's characters and mobile suits alongside the series's staff. It is the first Gundam series produced by Sunrise Beyond, an animation studio established after Xebec's closure in March 2019.

The series's Original Net Animation format and its planned release for online viewing and steaming came from Sunrise Beyond's producer, Takuya Okamoto. He did stated that "The TV brand is still large, so there was some concern that the broadcast scale would decline, but there is a strong point in the Internet distribution that not only Japan but the entire world can be watched simultaneously." Despite the series's shift into online streaming, the show will still air on television through BS11.

Media
Anime
The first season aired on Sunrise's premiere Gundam Channel streaming service from October 10 to December 26, 2019, with Sunrise announcing a simulcast streaming in YouTube and other platforms following with a TV airing on BS11 on October 12, 2019. A second season premiered on April 9, 2020. On April 27, 2020, it was announced that episodes from 19 onward would be delayed indefinitely due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. On June 25, 2020, it was announced that it would resume on July 9, 2020.https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2020-06-25/gundam-build-divers-re-rise-season-2-anime-resumes-after-covid-19-delay/.161072 Spira Spica performed the series' first opening theme song "Re:RISE", while PENGUIN RESEARCH performs the second opening theme song "Hatena". SudannaYuzuYully performed the series' first ending theme song "Magic Time" while Spira Spica performed the second and third ending songs "Twinkle" and "Heartful" (the last song is used in the ending of episode 20). The series's music is composed by Hidemura Kimura.

 No. Title Original air date

Original net animation
An original net animation (ONA) titled  premiered on Sunrise's own Gundam Channel YouTube on November 13, 2020. Similar to the previous battlogue series, the ONA features gunpla battles based on fan votes including characters from both Build Divers and Build Divers Re:Rise.https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2020-02-21/gundam-build-divers-gets-new-battlogue-animation-for-fan-voted-gunpla-battles/.156704 The ONA was directed by Masami Obari, and the rest of the staff from Gundam Build Divers Re:Rise returned to reprise their roles.https://www.animenewsnetwork.com/news/2020-10-12/gundam-build-divers-battlogue-anime-reveals-staff-november-13-debut/.165101

Manga
A spinoff manga titled  began serialization in Kadokawa Shoten's monthly Gundam Ace Magazine in December 2019. Ryōji Sekinishi and Shiitake Gensui return to write and illustrate the spinoff manga series with Takayuki Yanase providing the mecha designs.

Merchandise
Part of the series's merchandise was released under Bandai's long running Gunpla line of scale models and sub-collectible line such as Robot Spirits figures.