Lian Pin Koh (born 1976 in Singapore) is a conservation biologist based in the United States. He works for Conservation International as Principal (Vice President), Science Partnerships and Innovation.

Koh is also an Adjunct Professor of Applied Ecology and Conservation at the University of Adelaide, and Founding Director of ConservationDrones.org. 

Throughout his career, Koh has received multiple awards including the Australian Research Council Future Fellowship, the Swiss National Science Foundation Professorship, and was also named a World Economic Forum Young Global Leader in 2013.

 Career 
Koh was awarded a Ph.D. in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology by Princeton University in 2008. Following that, he received Post-Doctoral training at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Switzerland (ETH Zurich). In 2011, Koh was appointed an Assistant Professor by the Swiss National Science Foundation.

In 2014, he was recruited by the University of Adelaide in Australia to take on the position of Associate Professor of Applied Ecology & Conservation. He was subsequently awarded the prestigious Australian Research Council Future Fellowship (Level II)., and was promoted to full Professor in 2017. Koh helped set up and served as Director of two University research centers: the Centre for Applied Conservation Science, and the Unmanned Research Aircraft Facility.

In 2018, Koh took a hiatus from academia to joined Conservation International.

 Research 
Koh is an applied ecologist whose notable scientific contributions include the study of species co-extinctions and modeling the environmental impacts of industrial agriculture across the tropics.

His research focuses on developing the Science and Science-based decision support tools to help reconcile society’s growing consumptive needs with environmental protection. He addresses this challenge through field studies and experiments, computer simulations and modelling, as well as by co-opting emerging technologies for use in environmental research and applications.

Geographically his research is focused on the developing tropics where population growth is most rapid, the people are poorest, and biodiversity is richest and yet most threatened globally.

Koh has partnered with nongovernmental organisations, policymakers, industry players, social scientists, environmental economists, computer engineers and software developers. He has co-authored scientific publications with more than 100 colleagues from over 20 nations, and from top research institutions, including Harvard University, Princeton University, Yale University, Stanford University, Cambridge University, ETH Zurich, and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

 Impact 
Koh has published over 125 articles in journals, including Nature, Science, and Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA.

His research has received over 15,00 citations by his peers (with an h-index of >55). Koh is the most highly cited Singaporean ecologist. His work has real and significant impacts in both academia and civil society. He was bestowed the honor of a Young Global Leader by the World Economic Forum in 2013, for “... his record of professional accomplishments, commitment to society and potential to contribute to shaping the future of the world through his inspiring leadership”. Koh joins other leaders across the realms of politics, business, and the arts, including actor Leonardo DiCaprio, Google co-founders Larry Page and Sergei Brin, and Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg.

Koh is a pioneer in the use of low-cost drone technology for environmental applications. He is Founding Director of ConservationDrones.org, a non-profit organisation that seeks to introduce drone technology to scientists and conservationists worldwide. ConservationDrones.org has received numerous awards and media coverage (>650,000 visits to its website).

Koh was a speaker at the 2013 TED-Global conference in Edinburgh, where he spoke on the positive use of drones. His TED talk has been viewed over 600,000 times by a global audience.

 Outreach 
Koh is a regular plenary speaker at numerous international meetings, including the WWF Fuller Symposium in Washington D.C. in 2012, the Clinton Global Initiative University in Florida in 2013, and the Intergovernmental Eye on Earth Summit in Abu Dhabi in 2015.

He is passionate about the communication of Science to the public, as evidenced by numerous and regular features on his work by international media, including the New York Times, Smithsonian Magazine, Scientific American, NewScientist, the Telegraph, among others.

 Residences 
Since leaving Singapore in 2004, Koh has lived in Princeton (New Jersey), Zurich (Switzerland), Adelaide (Australia), and Seattle (Washington).