Leah C. Stokes is a political science communicator and Professor of Political Science at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Stokes investigates the politics around energy and environmental policy in the United States. She regularly writes about energy policy for newspapers and on social media.

 Early life and education 
Stokes earned her undergraduate degree in psychology and East Asian studies at the University of Toronto. She completed a Master of Public Administration at Columbia University. After graduating Stokes worked with Bruce Stanton at the Parliament of Canada. Her role involved policy analysis for the Environment and Sustainable Development Committee. In 2010 Stokes moved to Massachusetts Institute of Technology as graduate student, where she earned a Master's degree and a doctorate under the supervision Lawrence Susskind. At Massachusetts Institute of Technology Stokes created an environmental policy curriculum, including The Mercury Game, a treaty negotiation that is currently used by over 100 universities around the world. 

 Career 
In 2015 Stokes joined the faculty at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Her research considers energy policy and environmental policy in the United States. She has investigated the interaction between public opinion and policy making around renewable energy. She looked at what determines public opinion in particular states, and how the design and presentation of Renewable Portfolio Standards (RPS) changes public support for a particular policy. After conducting a survey of almost 60,000 people, Stokes identified that politicians are responsive to public opinion.

 Awards and honours 
Her awards and honours include:

 2010 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Siemens-MIT Energy Fellow
 2013 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Martin Fellow
 2018 Midwest Political Science Association Patrick J. Fett Award
 2019 Business and Politics (journal) David P. Baron Award
 2019 Information Technology and Innovation Foundation Scholar

 Selected publications 
Her publications include:

 
 
 

She has written for The Guardian, The Washington Post, The New York Times and The Los Angeles Times, and her work is regularly cited in the media, including in The Washington Examiner, Mashable, New Hampshire Public Radio, the National Observer, and E&E News. She has appeared on the Scholars Strategy Network podcast No Jargon.