Lolong (International title: Crocodile Whisperer) is a 2022 Philippine television drama action series broadcast by GMA Network. Directed by Rommel P. Penesa, it stars Ruru Madrid in the title role. It premiered on July 4, 2022 on the network's Telebabad line up replacing First Lady. The series concluded on September 30, 2022 with a total of 65 episodes. It was replaced by Maria Clara at Ibarra in its timeslot.

Cast and characters
150px|right|Ruru Madrid portrays the title role.

Lead cast
 Ruru Madrid as Rolando "Lolong" Candelaria

Supporting cast
 Christopher de Leon as Armando Banson 
 Jean Garcia as Donatella "Dona" Banson
 Shaira Diaz as Elsie Dominguez
 Arra San Agustin as Isabella "Bella" Melendez
 Paul Salas as Martin Candelaria / Martin Banson
 Rochelle Pangilinan as Karina Marabe 
 Bembol Roco as Narciso "Narsing" Candelaria
 Malou de Guzman as Isabelita "Isabel" Candelaria
 Mikoy Morales as Victoriano "Bokyo" Dela Cruz
 Ian de Leon as Lucas Morales
 DJ Durano as Alberto "Abet" Dominguez
 Marco Alcaraz as Marco Mendrano
 Maui Taylor as Dolores Baticusin

Guest cast
 Leandro Baldemor as Raul Candelaria
 Priscilla Almeda as Gloria Candelaria
 Pokwang as Coring
 Sue Prado as Riza dela Torre
 Luke Conde as Benjo Dominguez
 Vin Abrenica as Diego
 Thea Tolentino as Celia
 Alma Concepcion as Ines Candelaria 
 Lucho Ayala as Victor
 Rafael Rosell as Reyes
 Ryan Eigenmann as Delfin
 Mon Confiado as Luciano

Episodes

Production
Broadcast journalist Jessica Soho came up with the series' concept of conflict between humans and a crocodile, which was featured in her show Kapuso Mo, Jessica Soho. Lolong is named after a crocodile of the same name, which was known as the world's largest crocodile in captivity. A  long animatronic, enhanced by computer-generated imagery was used to depict the crocodile "Dakila".

In October 2020, Filipino actress Sanya Lopez left the series due to joining the drama series First Yaya. Kim Domingo was also initially attached to appear in the series. Principal photography commenced in July 2021 in Quezon. It was halted in August 2021 due to the enhanced community quarantine in National Capital Region caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Accolades
+ Accolades received by Lolong Year Award Category Recipient Result  2022 Gawad Pilipino Awards Best Primetime Series Lolong   Asian Academy Creative Awards Best Visual or Special FX (TV or Feature Film)  