The S4 is a railway service of the St. Gallen S-Bahn that provides hourly service over a circular route () that includes , , and , in the canton of St. Gallen. Südostbahn, a private company primarily owned by the federal government and the canton, operates the service.

 Operations 
304px|right|Stadler Flirt3 EMU (in operation since 2019)
The S4 operates hourly in both a clockwise and counter-clockwise direction. A full journey around the circle takes approximately three hours. In , which lies to the west of the junction between the Uznach–Wattwil and Rapperswil–Ziegelbrücke lines, the trains reverse their direction of travel.  The S4 circle line is sometimes referred to as the 'Alpstein round trip' (Alpsteinrundfahrt).SOB.ch: https://unterwegs.sob.ch/de/stories/rundfahrt-saentis The service is operated by Stadler Rail Flirt/Flirt-3 EMUs of Südostbahn (SOB). 

The S4 offers half-hourly services in combination with other services between the following stations: with the S6 (St. Gallen S-Bahn) between  and Uznach, with the IR Voralpen-Express between Uznach and St. Gallen, and with the S2 of St. Gallen S-Bahn between Wattwil and Altstätten SG. Service between St. Gallen and St. Margrethen is more frequent due to the additional S5 (St. Gallen S-Bahn), which runs hourly.

 Route 
304px|right|S-Bahn St. Gallen network as of December 2021https://www.ostwind.ch/assets/resources/Dateien/Download/zonenplaene/2022-sbb-rv-sg.pdf
  –  –  (inversion of direction) – St. Gallen (operates in both directions)

In clockwise direction:

 St. Gallen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Buchs SG
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Uznach
 
 
 
  (stops only on request)
  (stops only on request)
 
  (stops only on request)
 
 
 St. Gallen

 History 
Prior to the December 2013 timetable change, the S4 operated between St. Gallen and . Local service between Uznach and  was handled by an hourly regional service that ran between  and . Service southeast of St. Gallen toward Sargans was handled by various local services, but only the  operated over the whole route.