Cristóbal Talcapillán, also known as Don Cristóbal,de Vea 1886, p. 574 was an young Chono man who became known for his role in ushering the Antonio de Vea expedition into the archipelagoes of Patagonia.

In the early 1670s the English sailor John Narborough explored of the coasts of southern Patagonia. This caused great alarm among Spanish authorities who feared the establishment of an English base in Patagonia.. As concequence various expeditions were sent from the Spanish settlements of Chiloé to the south. Jerónimo Díaz de Mendoza led an expedition in 1674 that having failed to find any Europeans in Patagonia went back to Chiloé with Cristóbal Talcapillán and other indigenous Chono they encontered. In 1674 he was about 25 years old according to estimations of the Spanish. In Chacao Cristóbal Talcapillán rapidly learned Veliche which was the main language of Chiloé –including the Spanish settlements– at the time. While there he begun to give indications about the existence of European settlements in the archipelagoes of Patagonia. Spanish authorities learned about this and interviewed him. He drew accurate "maps" of the territory south of Chiloé giving credibility to his allegations. Authorities went was far as sending Cristóbal Talcapillán to Lima, the capital of the viceroyalty, to investigate his claims. Cristóbal Talcapillán was sent back to Chiloé and it was then decided that a major expedition should be sent to the verify the presence of Englishmen or other Europeans.

Thus an expedition led by Antonio de Vea departed from El Callao in September 1675.de Vea 1886, p. 543 Picking Cristóbal Talcapillán in Chiloé where the expedition was also outfitted with nine dalcas.de Vea 1886, p. 557

During the navigation in the fjords and channels the Spanish begun to dubt the indications of Cristóbal Talcapillán. Cristóbal Talcapillán help in translating interrogations of a captured Chono woman suggested his translations were fabrications. Don Cristobal retracted indications about where to find iron anchors and said he had been coherced to lie.de Vea 1886, p. 578 It is possible that the fabications of Cristóbal Talcapillán were done to applease the Spanish as he learned about Spanish culture and what kind things were of their interest.

Having realised that Cristóbal Talcapillán was highly unreliable the expedition returned to Chiloé in late January 1676.de Vea 1886, p. 586 