INDECT is a research project in the area of intelligent security systems performed by several European universities since 2009 and funded by the European Union. Project's Grant Agreement The purpose of the project is to involve European scientists and researchers in the development of solutions to and tools for automatic threat detection  Official website through e.g. processing of CCTV camera data streams, EU funding 'Orwellian' artificial intelligence plan to monitor public for "abnormal behaviour" standardization of video sequence quality for user applications, Optimising task-based video quality - Springer threat detection in computer networks INACT — INDECT Advanced Image Cataloguing Tool - Springer as well as data and privacy protection. Benefits for the security of citizens & selected tools and applications — indect-home Overview of Recent Advances in CCTV Processing Chain in the INDECT and INSIGMA Projects

The area of research, applied methods and techniques are described in the public deliverables  Public Deliverables which are available to the public on the project's website. Practically, all information related to the research is public. Only documents that comprise information related to financial data or information that could negatively influence the competitiveness and law enforcement capabilities of parties involved in the project are not published. This follows regulations and practices applied in EU research projects.

Application and target users
The main end-user of INDECT solutions are police forces and security services.

The principle of operation of the project is detecting threats and identifying source of threats, without monitoring and searching for particular citizens or groups of citizens. Then, the system operator (i.e. police officer) decides whether an intervention of services responsible for public security are required or not. Further investigation eventually leading to persons related to threats are performed, preserving the presumption of innocence,http://www.policja.pl/ftp/pliki/police_act.pdf on the basis of existing procedures already used by police services and prosecutors. As it can be found in the project deliverables, INDECT does not involve storage of personal data (such as names, addresses, identity document numbers, etc.).

A similar, behavior based surveillance program was SAMURAI (Suspicious and Abnormal behavior Monitoring Using a netwoRk of cAmeras & sensors for sItuation awareness enhancement).CORDIS record for "SAMURAI"

Expected results
The main expected results of the INDECT project are:
 Trial of intelligent analysis of video and audio data for threat detection in urban environments
 Creation of tools and technology for privacy and data protection during storage and transmission of information using quantum cryptography and new methods of digital watermarking
 Performing computer-aided detection of threats and targeted crimes in Internet resources with privacy-protecting solutions
 Construction of a search engine for rapid semantic search based on watermarking of content related to child pornography and human organ trafficking
 Implementation of a distributed computer system that is capable of effective intelligent processing

Controversy
Some media and other sources accuse INDECT of privacy abuse, collecting personal data, European Parliament on data protection and keeping information from the public. European Parliament on the project's transparency to the public Consequently, these issues have been commented and discussed by some Members of the European Parliament. Parliamentary questions 

As seen in the project's documentation, INDECT does not involve mobile phone tracking or call interception. , Preliminary report on police and prosecutor repositories and access procedures

The rumors about testing INDECT during 2012 UEFA European Football Championship also turned out to be false., European Parliament on testing INDECT during EURO 2012.

The mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme to the European Parliament strongly urges the European Commission to immediately make all documents available and to define a clear and strict mandate for the research goal, the application, and the end users of INDECT, and stresses a thorough investigation of the possible impact on fundamental rights.Committee on Industry, Research and Energy: Report on the mid-term review of the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Union for research, technological development and demonstration activities (2011/2043(INI)). Results of FP7, 27. 18 April 2011. Nevertheless, according to Mr. Paweł Kowal, MEP, the project had the ethical review on 15 March 2011 in Brussels with the participation of ethics experts from Austria, France, Netherlands, Germany and Great Britain.