This is a list of mass shootings in the United States that have occurred in 2020. Mass shootings are incidents involving multiple victims of firearm-related violence. The precise inclusion criteria are disputed, and there is no broadly accepted definition.

Gun Violence Archive, a nonprofit research group that tracks shootings and their characteristics in the United States, defines a mass shooting as an incident in which four or more people, excluding the perpetrator(s), are shot in one location at roughly the same time. The Congressional Research Service narrows that definition, limiting it to "public mass shootings", and defined by four or more victims killed. It excludes counting wounded survivors. The Washington Post and Mother Jones use similar definitions, with the latter acknowledging that their definition "is a conservative measure of the problem", as shootings with fewer fatalities occur. The crowdsourced Mass Shooting Tracker project defines a mass shooting as "an incident where four or more people are shot in a single shooting spree. This may include the shooter themself, or police shootings of civilians around the shooter."

As of November 30, there have been 587 shootings that fit this criteria, resulting in 482 deaths and 2,451 injuries, for a total of 2,933 victims.

 Definitions 
 Stanford University MSA Data Project: three or more persons shot in one incident, excluding the perpetrator(s), at one location, at roughly the same time. Excluded are shootings associated with organized crime, gangs or drug wars.
 Mass Shooting Tracker: four or more persons shot in one incident, at one location, at roughly the same time.
 Gun Violence Archive/Vox: four or more shot in one incident, excluding the perpetrators, at one location, at roughly the same time.
 Mother Jones: three or more shot and killed in one incident at a public place, excluding the perpetrators.
 The Washington Post: four or more shot and killed in one incident at a public place, excluding the perpetrators.
 ABC News/FBI: four or more shot and killed in one incident, excluding the perpetrators, at one location, at roughly the same time.
 Congressional Research Service: four or more shot and killed in one incident, excluding the perpetrators, at a public place, excluding gang-related killings and those done with a profit-motive.

Only incidents considered mass shootings by at least two of the above sources are listed below.

 List 
Parenthetical number indicates the amount of mass shootings that occurred in that city year to date.

 Date City State  Dead Injured Total DescriptionLynn (2)Massachusetts156Six people were wounded in an evening shooting. One of the victims later died at the hospital.December 26, 2020Rockford (5)Illinois336Don Carter Lanes shooting: Three people are killed and three others injured in a shooting at a bowling alley. The shooter is believed to have selected his victims at random. A person of interest has been taken into custody by authorities.Shooting at Illinois bowling alley leaves 3 dead, 3 injured Associated Press, December 26, 2020Tampa (5)Florida224Two men were killed and two injured in an early morning targeted shooting in Ybor City.Miami (5)Florida134Three adults and a juvenile were wounded in an afternoon drive-by shooting. One of the wounded later died at the hospital.Boynton Beach (2)Florida145Four people were injured and one was killed after a shooting on Christmas Day.AtkinsArkansas505Five females aged between eight to fifty; three were children, were found killed by a family member. Police believe it was domestic related.LakelandFlorida145After a teenager got into a conflict with another group, four people were injured and one was killed after a shooting at the teenager’s home. MeridianMississippi505Four individuals were discovered killed in three separate homes after wellness checks were called for them. The perpetrator died of a self inflicted gunshot wound.MayfieldKentucky404A wife, husband, and two children were fatally shot inside of their home. Bridgeport (3)Connecticut224Two men were killed at a sports bar in an apparent targeted shooting. Two innocent bystanders were wounded. Chicago (53)Illinois066Six people were wounded after someone walked into and opened fire inside a South Side beauty salon in the Burnside neighborhood, shortly after midnight. The salon was hosting an after hours party.Philadelphia (27)Pennsylvania044Three men and a woman were shot in the Kingsessing neighborhood.  Cocaine and firearms were recovered on the scene.St. Louis (11)Missouri044Following a dispute outside of a restaurant four were people shot.ElkviewWest Virginia404A family member discovered two parents and two children, aged 12 and 13-years-old, killed in their home. The killer was reportedly a third teenaged child of the family.San Bernardino (2)California134A man was killed and three others wounded in an early morning shooting.CopiagueNew York134A man was killed and three others were wounded inside a deli.New York City (23)New York044Four men were wounded in an afternoon shooting in the Boerum Hill neighborhood of Brooklyn.LandoverMaryland134A man was killed and three others wounded at a large early morning gathering.TiftonGeorgia044Four people were wounded near the Charles Spencer Elementary School during school hours. No students were harmed or in danger.Jackson (Ms) (6)Mississippi055Five men were wounded in a late night shooting. They were playing dice outside an apartment complex when a man drove up and started shooting. The man chased them through the complex before fleeing.MetairieLouisiana224Two people were killed and two wounded in a parking lot after an SUV pulled into it.LacombeLouisiana235A group of four men attempted to rob a home at gun point. The home owner opened fire in defense and killed two of the robbers and wounded the other two. The homeowner's four-year-old child was also wounded.VenusTexas066Six people were wounded at a rodeo outdoor live music venue, with one to two thousand attendees present. Police had been called to the venue three times prior to the shooting, due to fights.HaywardCalifornia134Officers responding to reports of a shooting shortly after midnight found a woman dead and three other individuals injured.Woman Dies, 3 Other People Injured In Hayward Shooting Over Weekend KPIX-TV, December 7, 2020AutryvilleNorth Carolina066Shortly before midnight an argument between two men at a bonfire escalated. Six people were wounded.Chicago (52)Illinois044Three men and a seventeen-year-old girl were injured after someone shot at them from across the street. The group was standing outside a home in West Garfield Park.MorrisvillePennsylvania134An eighteen-year-old was killed and three other teenagers were injured after a dispute between two groups escalated.PalmerAlaska404A man was killed, and shortly later a woman and two children; aged 10 and 7-years-old were killed at a home. An additional child was found uninjured in the home.GrenadaMississippi01111Eleven people were shot at a biker club and law enforcement are treating the incident as a "mass shooting". The injured were treated at nearby hospitals and no arrests have been made.Memphis (8)Tennessee224Two people were killed and two wounded in an apartment complex near Memphis International Airport.New Orleans (9)Louisiana044Four people were shot in the evening, in New Orleans East.AikenSouth Carolina11415A man was killed and fourteen other people were injured shortly after midnight at a nightclub. At least three men fled in a vehicle and continued to fire from the vehicle.Macon (2)Georgia156A woman was killed and five people wounded by gunfire and two stabbed outside a nightclub after an early morning argument.Toledo (4)Ohio066Five people were wounded while leaving a club in the early morning. A sixth person was wounded by a stray bullet while at home.Henderson (2)Nevada145One person was killed and four injured in a shooting outside a 7-Eleven store. The possible suspects were arrested on other charges in nearby Parker, Arizona.Suspects in deadly holiday shooting in Henderson arrested in Arizona Las Vegas Review-Journal, November 26, 2020TrentonNew Jersey044Four people were wounded in an evening shooting in the Stuyvesant area.New York City (22)New York167A woman was killed and six others were injured at a party in the Bedford–Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn.1 Woman Is Killed and 6 Others Are Wounded in Brooklyn Mass Shooting The New York Times, November 23, 2020Chicago (51)Illinois066Six people were wounded in an early morning shooting in Gresham on the South Side after a man opened fire on them from the sidewalk.Phoenix (2)Arizona145A woman was killed and three adults and a teenager were wounded at an illegal warehouse party.BellevueNebraska224Two people were killed and two others wounded at a Sonic Drive-In after police responded to a call of a bomb inside a truck. A suspect has been arrested.ElbertaMichigan314A family of four, a husband and wife and their two adult sons, were shot in their home. The husband is in critical condition at a local hospital. A recently discharged gun was found at the scene and police do not believe there is a suspect at large.3 killed, 1 critically injured in Northern Michigan shooting MLive.com, November 21, 2020WauwatosaWisconsin088Mayfair Mall shooting: Eight people were hospitalized with non-life threatening injuries after a person opened fire at the Mayfair Mall. Several people, including a 15-year-old boy from Milwaukee, have been arrested in the case.Active shooter reported at Mayfair mall, at least 8 injured and taken to hospital ''Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, November 20, 202015-year-old arrested in connection with the Mayfair mall shooting Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, November 22, 2020Haines CityFlorida134One person was killed and three injured in a drive-by shooting while standing under a carport.Houston (12)Texas325A man shot and killed his uncle and cousin and wounded his wife and aunt before committing suicide. His uninjured infant daughter was also in the home.FlorenceSouth Carolina044Four people were wounded in an evening shooting.Jackson (Tn) (2)Tennessee044Four people were wounded at a home that had been the site of a break in back in January 2020.Miami (4)Florida044Two adults and two children under the age of seven were wounded in a drive-by shooting. They were standing outside a home in Golden Glades.Chicago (50)Illinois044Four people were wounded in a drive-by shooting while walking down a road on the West Side. Two of the wounded were teenage girls.Chicago (49)Illinois044Four people were wounded at the Dearborn homes after another group began an argument which escalated.Shreveport (3)Louisiana055Five people were shot shortly after midnight while attending a street gathering.RiverdaleGeorgia224Two men were killed and two injured at a trailer park in a late night shooting.SumterSouth Carolina314Shortly before midnight, three people were killed and a pregnant woman wounded in a home.FultonMissouri044Four people were wounded in a late night shooting at an event center. The center had been rented out for a birthday party prior to the shooting.Cincinnati (4)Ohio044Four teenagers, aged between twelve and fifteen, were wounded in an evening drive by shooting in the Winton Hills area.RiversideCalifornia235Officers responding to an assault with a deadly weapon call found two men who later died at a hospital. Three additional wounded individuals were identified at a hospital.Tampa (4)Florida246Officers responding to reports of multiple gunshots found two men dead and four wounded in an evening shooting.Gastonia (2)North Carolina066Six people were shot, including two police officers, when an argument inside a nightclub escalated.2 officers, 4 others shot at North Carolina night club WGHP, November 13, 2020 Tampa (3)Florida178A man was killed and seven other men and teenagers were wounded in a drive-by shooting. A car opened fire on a group gathered at a basketball court next to a Boys & Girls Club.Fort Worth (3)Texas044Two adults and two children were wounded in an afternoon shooting at a local food mart. Police are investigating it as possible gang activity.Virginia BeachVirginia044Two adults and two children under the age of twelve were wounded in a gated apartment complex.Nashville (4)Tennessee088Eight people and a dog were injured in a shooting on Commerce Street in the early hours of the morning.OgdenKansas044Four men were wounded outside a local bar shortly before midnight.Rock Hill (2)South Carolina134One individual was killed and three injured inside a local bar shortly after midnight.New Orleans (8)Louisiana224Two people were wounded and two killed in the Hollygrove section of the city. One of those killed may have been the target of the shooting.Toledo (3)Ohio314Three people were killed and one injured near an apartment complex. The shooting is believed to be connected to a hit and run accident just down the road.Jefferson CityMissouri044Four people were wounded in a shooting in a parking lot at a local sporting complex and gym located near the Jefferson City High School.Henderson (1)Nevada415A man shot and killed three people at an apartment complex before being shot dead by police. A fifth person was taken to a hospital with gunshot wounds but the condition of the person was not yet known.Atlantic CityNew Jersey134A man was killed and three wounded near a local bar that was hosting a Halloween party in the early morning.HollywoodSouth Carolina066Six people were wounded in an early morning shooting at a party in an abandoned house.Winston-SalemNorth Carolina134A man was killed and three others wounded shortly after midnight. A suspect was arrested shortly after.EvansvilleIndiana044Four people were wounded outside of a bar after an early morning argument escalated in a large crowd. The bar was the scene of a similar shooting in February 2019.Oklahoma City (2)Oklahoma134A man was killed and three others injured after someone fired into an event center.Rochester (4)New York224Two men were killed and two wounded outside an apartment building that was hosting a Halloween party, in the early morning.TucsonArizona224Two men were killed and two wounded in the desert near Tucson International Airport in the early morning.Sacramento (5)California044Four people were wounded in a drive-by shooting in the Natomas area. Those wounded had gathered at a home there.SumnerWashington055Five people were wounded after an argument escalated outside of a house party, shortly after midnight.AnaheimCalifornia044Four people were wounded in an early morning shooting at a strip club. The shooter pulled up outside the club and opened fire.College ParkMaryland077Seven people were wounded at a party held in a hotel room at the University of Maryland.Las Vegas (2)Nevada044Four people were shot in a neighborhood, at a believed house party after a dispute escalated. The wounded are believed to be teenagers.WaldorfMaryland134Two groups of men got into a dispute inside a cigar and hookah lounge and the argument escalated. One man was killed and three injured.Chicago (48)Illinois134A man was killed and two adults and a sixteen-year-old were injured after a man entered a home in Morgan Park and opened fire. Police believe the shooting was drug related.Winter GardenFlorida044A patrol officer discovered four people wounded after an argument escalated late at night. One of the victims has a concealed weapons permit, but officers are unsure who actually fired.Newark (3)New Jersey134One individual was killed and three others wounded after a heated argument escalated.RoanokeVirginia044Officers responded to a report of multiple shots fired and found four individuals wounded in a home.BessemerAlabama134An eighteen-year-old was killed and three other teens were wounded in a house during the evening.Fort Worth (3)Texas235A fight broke out at an early morning house party and escalated. Two men were killed and three others wounded.San Antonio (7)Texas044A dispute potentially near I-35 escalated and four people within a car were shot. The car crashed a short time later. Three adults and a thirteen-year-old were wounded and three additional children were not injured.Raleigh (2)North Carolina134Four men were shot in the early morning. Two men were later arrested for the shooting and a wounded man died later at the hospital.GreenwoodMississippi2810A gunman walked into a family's front yard and opened fire on a family gathering shortly before midnight. The family had gathered for a funeral and two were killed and eight wounded.Miami (3)Florida134Shortly before midnight someone opened fire in a Miami neighborhood. A man was killed and two adults and an infant girl were wounded.Boston (3)Massachusetts044Officers responded to a ShotSpotter alert and multiple 911 calls and found two individuals wounded. An additional two transported themselves to the hospital.Baltimore (10)Maryland044Three men and a woman were wounded in a shooting shortly after midnight.RayneLouisiana055A vehicle with six passengers – two adults and four juveniles –  was traveling on I-10 when a car next to them opened fire. Five people in the car were wounded.New York City (21)New York156A man was killed and five other people were wounded in a drive-by shooting in Prospect Lefferts Gardens in Brooklyn.CantonMississippi134A gunman ambushed four people waiting in a car at a McDonald's drive through. One person in the car was killed and two adults and a thirteen-year-old were injured.Houston (11)Texas314An argument at a local open-mike night for rappers at a club escalated when at least two people opened fire. Three men were killed and one injured.MansfieldOhio055Five people were wounded in a drive-by-shooting while standing outside a house during a party. A seventeen-year-old and four adults were among the injured.New Orleans (7)Louisiana134A man was killed and three others wounded after gunfire erupted in front of a convenience store.AnnapolisMaryland134An argument at an early morning house party escalated and one man was killed. Another adult and two seventeen-year-old girls were wounded.Chicago (47)Illinois145A gunman walked into an East Garfield Park home and opened fire. He killed one man and wounded four others.Nashville (3)Tennessee044Two men were discovered wounded at a home near Belmont University, and two others arrived at local hospitals later.LockportNew York156Shortly after midnight two men approached a home hosting a Halloween themed house party opened fire on the closed garage door. A 21-year-old college student was killed and five others were wounded.Rock Hill (1)South Carolina055A patrol officer heard gunfire near a local lounge in the early morning, and found a wounded man. Four others were transported by private vehicles to local hospitals.San Jose (3)California246Shortly before midnight two men were killed and four injured at a local restaurant.Orlando (3)Florida314Three people were killed and one wounded after an argument occurred in the early morning at a private motorcycle club over a motorcycle. The wounded victim is refusing to cooperate with police.MesaArizona167Six people were injured in a drive-by shooting and one was killed. Three of the injured were children and three were adults. The victim killed was one year old.Mesa PD: Suspects, witnesses asked to come forward in shooting that injured seven people Fox 10 Phoenix, October 17, 2020San Francisco (2)California134A man was killed and another and two women were injured in an evening shooting.Baltimore (9)Maryland077Seven people were wounded in an evening shooting in Southwest Baltimore. Two people were discovered at the scene and five were later discovered at area hospitals.Lafayette (3)Louisiana224A party after a University of Louisiana football game in Moore Park led to an early morning shooting after an argument escalated. Two people were wounded and two killed.Philadelphia (26)Pennsylvania044Four men were injured at a gas station in an evening shooting in Southwest Philadelphia.Myrtle Beach (2)South Carolina235A man was killed and four others were injured at a local grocery store early in the morning. One of the injured died three days later.Atlanta (9)Georgia044Four people were wounded in an evening shooting at a downtown hotel. Additional guns and pills were discovered at the scene of the shooting.Chicago (46)Illinois134Four people were inside a vehicle when they were hit by gunfire near the West Garfield Park on the West Side. A man died and two adults and a seventeen-year-old girl were wounded.KingstreeSouth Carolina088A man opened fire after he was ejected from a nightclub by firing into the club while standing in the road. Three people were discovered in the club and five were taken to the hospital in private vehicles.JenningsMissouri224A woman and her six-year-old daughter were killed and her other daughters aged sixteen and ten-years-old were wounded. The woman's boyfriend was arrested as a person of interest.Philadelphia (25)Pennsylvania167At least two gunmen opened fire on a group of people in the city's Frankford neighborhood. One man was killed and six others wounded.Anchorage (2)Alaska145A man was killed and one man and three women were injured in an early morning shooting at a house party. Two teenagers were arrested and charged for the shooting.New York City (20)New York134One man was killed and three injured in an evening shooting at a Brooklyn building. Neighbors claim that the building was a local gambling den.Washington, D.C. (8)Washington, D.C.044Two men and two women were shot in an evening shooting, with one victim in critical condition.Indianapolis (4)Indiana347Police responding to reports of an early morning shooting found three men dead outside an establishment. Four additional wounded were identified at the hospital after transporting themselves.Atlanta (8)Georgia156A fight broke out between two women inside a store and shortly after three men arrived with guns and entered the store. The men opened fire, and customers returned fire, with one man killed and three adults and two juveniles injured.Sacramento (4)California134A nine-year-old girl was killed and two adults and a six-year-old girl were wounded at a Del Paso Heights park. They were part of a family gathering when a gunman drove up and opened fire.ClarksvilleTennessee055At least five people were wounded in an early morning shooting at a house party. An argument had broken out and escalated into gun fire.Seattle (2)Washington044A seventeen-year-old girl and three others were wounded in an evening shooting in Rainier Valley.New Orleans (6)Louisiana044Four people were wounded in a shooting in the Central Business District. Victims ran away from the original scene causing officers to believe there were more shootings than actual.Detroit (9)Michigan055Two women and three men were wounded in a shooting shortly before midnight in a rental hall.Greensboro (3)North Carolina044Four North Carolina A&T State University students were wounded in an off-campus apartment complex.Milwaukee (7)Wisconsin077Seven people were shot at a funeral home.Seven people shot at Milwaukee funeral home, police say CNN, September 30, 2020Jacksonville (3)Florida044Two men and two women were wounded inside an apartment with no signs of a break-in.Philadelphia (24)Pennsylvania055Five men were wounded shortly before midnight while standing on a porch in the Logan section of the city.PlainsvilleOhio224Two men were killed and two wounded in an afternoon shooting. The men were recording a music video and got into an argument with another group which escalated.Detroit (8)Michigan066Four men and two women were injured in an early morning shooting after a large crowd had congregated outside a Gentleman's club in the city's southwest side.Nashville (2)Tennessee044Four people were wounded near an intersection in the afternoon after an argument escalated. The gunman walked away to his vehicle, retrieved a pistol, opened fire, and drove away.SanduskyOhio044A man shot and wounded four people shortly before midnight, with one victim discovered in a vehicle by police.San Bernardino (1)California134A nineteen-year-old were killed and three others injured in an evening shooting.Philadelphia (23)Pennsylvania044Two teens, aged fifteen and sixteen-years-old and two adults were wounded just before midnight at a block party in West Philadelphia. The teens and one adult had been leaving the party when the gunman opened fire.EnterpriseAlabama134One man died and three others injured after someone opened fire on an early morning party in an apartment complex parking lot.WaterlooIowa268Two people were killed and six injured in a shooting at a motorcycle club where over 100 people had gathered. Four others suffered injuries from broken glass and debris while fleeing from the gunfire.Chicago (45)Illinois044Two men and two women were injured in an early morning drive-by shooting in Marquette Park on the Southwest Side. Philadelphia (22)Pennsylvania044Four teenagers aged between seventeen and nineteen-years-old were injured in a late night shooting in the Frankford section of the city.HamptonGeorgia134A woman was killed and her mother and young child were injured when a man entered the home and shot. He shot and injured an additional woman while carjacking her in an attempt to flee.Minneapolis (6)Minnesota055Three men and two women were injured outside a bar early in the morning after an argument escalated. The bar was the scene of another mass shooting in June were a man died and six were injured.StruthersOhio145A man barged into a home in the early morning and opened fire, wounding four adults and killing a four-year-old child. The child reportedly was held by his mother when the man opened fire and was struck and killed in her arms.New York City (19)New York044Two women were discovered wounded in front of a house in Queens by police. Two men arrived at the hospital by private vehicles at a later time.StamfordConnecticut134A woman was killed and three others injured in a housing complex parking lot shortly after midnight. A large crowd had gathered and someone opened fire.Buffalo (3)New York145A woman was killed and four other people were injured in an early morning shooting at a street party.Rochester (3)New York21416Rochester shooting: Two people were killed and 14 others were injured in Rochester at a backyard party on Pennsylvania Avenue.Chicago (44)Illinois044Four people were wounded in West Pullman less than an hour after the shooting in West Englewood. Two sedans pulled up to a group outside and opened fire towards people on the sidewalk, home porch and inside the home.Chicago (43)Illinois044Four men were wounded in West Englewood while standing outside when someone opened fire.PlainfieldNew Jersey044Police officers responded to a shooting after a ShotShopper alert and found four people wounded.West MemphisArkansas055Five people were shot in an evening shooting.Little Rock (3)Arkansas044Four people were wounded in a drive-by afternoon shooting, near I-630.Philadelphia (21)Pennsylvania235Two men were killed and three wounded while playing basketball at the Roberto Clemente Playground in Spring Garden. Police believe the men were targeted as the three shooters chased them down, after the first confrontation.San Jose (2)California235Two people were killed and three others injured in a quintuple shooting near San Jose State University.Chicago (42)Illinois055Five people, including three teenagers, were wounded in a drive by shooting. The group were outside celebrating Mexican Independence.BakerLouisiana044Three people were wounded in a vehicle and a fourth while walking down the street, after a drug deal turned into a robbery. One of the wounded was an eight-year-old girl.New BrunswickNew Jersey268Two people died and six others were injured in an overnight shooting near Rutgers University.Grand RapidsMichigan077Seven people were wounded in a late night shooting outside a business in the city's southeast side. One victim's injuries were considered life-threatening.7 people shot outside Grand Rapids business, among 11 shot overnight citywide MLive.com, September 13, 2020 ManchesterTennessee336A man opened fire inside a vehicle on I-24 and killed one person in his vehicle and wounded another. He attempted to carjack three vehicles and wounded two people, before taking two hostages. At the end of the hostage taking a hostage and the gunman were dead and the other hostage released.Tampa (2)Florida044A security guard and three club goers were wounded after an individual opened fire from a car shortly after midnight.Chicago (41)Illinois134A man was killed and two adults and a seventeen-year-old boy were wounded while sitting on a homes porch in Englewood, after two men exited a vehicle and opened fire.Chicago (40)Illinois246A man opened fire at an early morning house party after an argument escalated in the Austin neighborhood. Another individual returned fire causing the first shooter and three others to be wounded and two others killed.WilsonNorth Carolina055Four adults and a teenager were wounded after a verbal altercation at a house party escalated.DonaldsonLouisiana055Five people were wounded at a large party, with one aged sixteen-years-old.New Orleans (5)Louisiana314Four minutes after a shooting, police were alerted to a second in which three men died, and one wounded.St. Louis (10)Missouri134A man was killed and three others wounded in the Wellston neighborhood.Baltimore (8)Maryland055Five people including a seventeen-year-old were injured while playing a dice game when a vehicle pulled up and opened fire.New Orleans (4)Louisiana044Four people including a fourteen-year-old boy were injured in Central City.New York City (18)New York055A fifteen-year-old shooter opened fire at a group of people in a drive-by shooting, including a six-year old in Brooklyn. Police believe the shooting to be gang related.Indianapolis (3)Indiana145An eighteen-year-old was killed and four others injured after a fight broke out during a party in the Butler-Tarkington neighborhood over a broken table.AguangaCalifornia707A shooting at a large marijuana grow house left seven people dead.7 people shot to death at marijuana grow house in Inland Empire, authorities say Los Angeles Times, September 8, 2020  Chicago (39)Illinois134An eight-year-old girl was killed and three others injured when another vehicle opened fire on them while they were sitting in another car in the Canaryville neighborhood.Chicago (38)Illinois044Four people were wounded in the South Shore neighborhood in a drive-by shooting. Three adults and a seventeen-year-old were injured.Commerce (2)Colorado044Four people were wounded at a large house party after a fight broke out in the early morning.Memphis (7)Tennessee044Two people opened fire in an apartment and wounded three adults and a five-year-old child.Baltimore (7)Maryland044Responding officers found a wounded man and three other wounded individuals transported themselves to the hospital.Kansas City (4)Missouri066Six people were wounded in Swope Park where a large crowd had gathered to watch cars do burnouts and donuts.St. Louis (9)Missouri134One woman was killed and three others injured in the Hamilton Heights neighborhood.SpartaGeorgia167Responding officers found a man dead and two wounded at an early morning birthday party. Four other wounded were identified at the hospital.New IberiaLouisiana055Five people were wounded at a night club, and separate charges were filed against the club owner for operating during COVID-19 restrictions.Houston (10)Texas044A woman and three men were wounded after a party with multiple motorcycle clubs, had a large fight in the parking lot with multiple shooters.Little Rock (2)Arkansas044A man was found wounded at the River Market district, with witnesses stating the shooter opened fire after pulling a gun from his fanny pack. Three children aged, seventeen, sixteen and twelve-years-old were also wounded.Baltimore (6)Maryland134Two men were discovered wounded by responding officers, one of whom later died at the hospital. Two more wounded were identified after transporting themselves to the hospital.WillistonFlorida066Six people were wounded in an early morning shooting at a block party/protest that was organized by a man to protest "inequitable narratives."Miami (2)Florida044Four men were wounded in a drive-by shooting shortly before midnight.Philadelphia (20)Pennsylvania066Five men aged eighteen to twenty-six-years-old were found wounded in an east Germantown street shortly before midnight. A sixth man was found wounded in his apartment building from a stray bullet a half-block away.Little Rock (1)Arkansas044Two bystanders including a seventeen-year-old were wounded shortly before midnight at an apartment complex. Two additional wounded were discovered later by police, who stated the shooting occurred after the individuals they had met to purchase guns from, turned on them and opened fire.HensleyArkansas134A nineteen-year-old was killed and two nineteen-year-old and an eighteen-year-old were injured, when a car pulled up alongside their vehicle and opened fire on I-530.Philadelphia (19)Pennsylvania224Two seventeen-year-olds were killed and a seventeen and eighteen year old wounded in a shooting in Point Breeze.Albany (Ga) (2)Georgia 134One man was killed and two other adults and a sixteen-year-old were wounded while playing cards in an early morning drive-by shooting.Oakland (3)California044Three teenagers, two fifteen-year-olds and a seventeen-year-old, and an adult were wounded in the Brookfield Village neighborhood in East Oakland. Police believe it to be a targeted shooting.TallahasseeFlorida044Police responding to a call of several people shot, found two adults and two teenagers aged thirteen and seventeen-years-old wounded in a townhouse complex.San Antonio (6)Texas224A nineteen and seventeen-year-old were killed and two other teenagers were wounded, when a vehicle pulled up to the car that they were in and opened fire. Officers believe at least one person in the vehicle was the intended target.Lexington (2)Kentucky077Seven people were wounded at a community gathering at a local community center. Eyewitnesses were split on how the shooting occurred.Buffalo (2)New York145Five people were wounded in an early morning shooting, with one later dying at a hospital.Chicago (37)Illinois145Five people were shot, one fatally, at a restaurant in Morgan Park.5 People Shot, 1 Killed, In Dining Tent At Pancake House In Morgan Park CBS Chicago, August 30, 2020MadisonvilleKentucky055Four adults and a fourteen-year-old girl were injured at a block party when an unknown individual opened fire early in the morning.ZionIllinois044A drive by shooting injured three adults standing outside early in the morning. An eight-year-old boy was injured when a bullet entered his bedroom through a wall.Las Vegas (1)Nevada224Shortly before midnight a group was walking down an alley toward a store, when they were approached by three men. One opened fire and killed two of the group and injured two others.Rock Island (2)Illinois156A man was killed and five others injured in an early morning shooting near a local pub.Dallas (3)Texas055Four adults and a fifteen-year-old boy were wounded in a late night shooting in the Deep Ellum district.Minneapolis (5)Minnesota044Four men were wounded by multiple shooters who fled the scene in the car they shot from.PortlandOregon134A sixteen-year-old boy was killed and three other juveniles were wounded in Gateway Discovery Park.PontiacMichigan314A man engaged in a year-long dispute with neighbors, shot four of them as they sat on his porch. Three died and one was wounded, with the shooter later turning himself in.Hilton Head IslandSouth Carolina044Three men and a woman were injured in a late night shooting, while in a large gathering.Philadelphia (18)Pennsylvania044Three adults and a seventeen-year-old boy were injured in East Germantown in an evening shooting.Norfolk (2)Virginia055Norfolk police said five people were shot on Wednesday night. One of the victims was a 1-month-old child. No suspect information is available at this time.Rochester (3)New York044Four men were wounded in an evening shooting, with two being transported to the hospital in private vehicles.Detroit (7)Michigan044Four men were wounded after a vehicle pulled up and opened fire, with one of the wounded returning fire.Sacramento (3)California134A man was killed and three others wounded, in an early morning shooting.West Palm BeachFlorida044Four people were wounded in an evening shooting.Richmond (3)Virginia145A man was killed and four others including a teenage boy were wounded in a night shooting.Pine BluffArkansas077Seven people were wounded when gunfire erupted while a large crowd was gathered outside a gas station early in the morning.New York City (17)New York134A man was killed and three others wounded in a housing complex in Brooklyn in the early morning.Somerville (Tn)Tennessee145A nineteen-year-old man was killed and two men and two women injured in an early morning shooting at a party.ChampaignIllinois044Four men were wounded at a party outside an apartment complex when a fight escalated early in the morning.Chicago (36)Illinois044Four men were wounded standing outside a business in the Englewood neighborhood, in an afternoon drive-by shooting.PuebloColorado066Early in the morning responding officers found three wounded individuals at a home near Pikes Peak International Raceway. Three more wounded were identified at a local hospital and some of the wounded are teenagers. Officers believe the shooting happened at a house party.Rockford (4)Illinois134Shortly before midnight one man was killed and three others injured.HueytownAlabama134One person was killed and three wounded after an early morning shooting near the Allison Bonnet Memorial Drive.Philadelphia (17)Pennsylvania044A gun fight wounded two adults and two seventeen-year-olds in West Philadelphia.Chicago (35)Illinois066Five adults and a seventeen-year-old were wounded after a man stepped out of a vehicle and opened fire on a large gathering. The shooting took place in Gresham in the South Side.Philadelphia (16)Pennsylvania145A man was killed and four others wounded including a fifteen-year-old in the Strawberry Mansion neighborhood.New York City (16)New York044A car drove up to a Ravenswood Public Housing building in Queens and opened fire. A seventeen-year-old boy and three adults were wounded.Rockford (3)Illinois044Four people were wounded in the early morning at a large gathering in Twin Sisters Park.Louisville (6)Kentucky224Two people were killed and two people were wounded in a shooting late at night before the car they were in crashed.Cleveland (5)Ohio055Five people were wounded at Dove Park in an evening drive-by shooting.New York City (15)New York044Four men were wounded in an early morning shooting in Brooklyn. The suspected gunman fled in a car after opening fire.DaytonTexas325A man is accused of killing his ex-girlfriend, a man in her home, and a neighbor and wounding two others. He was later arrested after hiding in the surrounding woods.San Antonio (5)Texas055Five people were injured, one critically, in a shooting caused by a dispute at a flea market. A security guard returned fire.At least 5 people wounded in San Antonio flea market shooting The Hill, August 16, 2020Cincinnati (3)Ohio134Shortly after midnight a man was killed and three others were wounded.Cincinnati (2)Ohio2911One person died at the scene and one later at the hospital with nine others wounded in an early morning shooting.Lexington (1)Kentucky134An eighteen-year-old was killed and three others wounded after a disturbance occurred at a large gathering.Denver (5)Colorado257Two men were killed and five others were wounded in a shooting shortly after an earlier shooting.Cincinnati (1)Ohio134Responding officers found a man wounded shortly after midnight, who later died at the hospital. Three others arrived by private vehicles to the hospital.Oklahoma City (1)Oklahoma044Four people were wounded at a large birthday party in the parking lot.Philadelphia (15)Pennsylvania055Four adults and a sixteen-year-old boy were injured shortly before midnight at a large block party when a group on motorcycles arrived and opened fire.Rochester (2)New York055Five people were wounded shortly before midnight.BellevilleMichigan404Two men and two women were killed in a home, with one of the women killed identified as the shooter's former fiancée. The shooter boasted about the killings on social media and text messages before being arrested.New HavenConnecticut156One man was killed and five injured after a dice game grew violent shortly before midnight.Troy (Al)Alabama235Officers arrived at a large gathering early in the morning to disperse it. While doing so shots were fired in the apartment complex's parking lot. Two men were killed and three others wounded.New York City (14)New York044Three women and one man were wounded late at night on Lenox Avenue in Harlem.Dayton (2)Ohio134A woman was killed and three others wounded in a drive by shooting in the early morning.Newark (2)New Jersey145An eighteen year old was killed and four others wounded shortly after midnight.Los Angeles (5)California055Five people were wounded shortly after midnight outside of a warehouse in the Harbor Gateway neighborhood. The shooting occurred after an argument escalated, and an additional person was injured attempting to climb a fence.Denver (4)Colorado01010Ten people were injured in a drive-by shooting during a family gathering in a park.10 injured in Denver drive-by shooting while gathering at local park, police say USA Today, August 10, 2020Toledo (2)Ohio066Six people were wounded in the early morning after a large gathering turned violent near a shopping center.Washington, D.C. (7)Washington, D.C.121222020 Washington, D.C. block party shooting: A 17-year-old boy was killed and 21 others injured, including an off-duty police officer, at a party in the southeastern section of the nation's capital. Police are looking for three suspects.1 dead; at least 21 people, including off-duty DC officer, shot at Southeast DC party WTOP, August 9, 2020Jackson (Ms) (5)Mississippi044Four people were wounded in the evening, two of the victims drove away and later crashed outside a local bank.Houston (9)Texas044Four men were wounded being a gas station shortly before midnight. The men were playing dice, when a gunman walked up, shot them and fled on foot.PaducahKentucky145Shortly before midnight a man was killed and four others wounded in the city's north side.Philadelphia (14)Pennsylvania066A pregnant woman, three teenagers and two other women were wounded. They were a part of a large BBQ gathering at a public park.BrocktonMassachusetts055Five men were wounded at a house party which was detected by the city's gunshot detection system. Prior a woman from the same party was stabbed.BirminghamAlabama156A man was killed and five people, including an off-duty Birmingham Police officer, were wounded at a motorcycle club in Ensley. The shooting was reported to be due to an altercation escalating, with some of the victims innocent bystanders.Albany (NY) (2)New York134A 18-year-old man was killed and a 22-year-old, 28-year-old, and 29-year-old were injured in a drive by shooting involving multiple suspected perpetrators.Oakland (2)California134A man was killed and three others injured while standing outside a house party.Chicago (34)Illinois044An 8-year-old boy and three men were wounded in the North Lawndale neighborhood. The shooter exited a vehicle and opened fire on the group while they were standing on the sidewalk.MadisonWisconsin044Four people were wounded in Garner Park during a memorial service for a recently deceased individual. Over 300 people were gathered when gunfire broke out and a fifth person was injured fleeing.Washington, D.C. (6)Washington, D.C.044Four men were wounded in an evening shooting.Los Angeles (4)California145A woman was killed and four others were injured at a rented mansion house party. The home was on the famed Mulholland Drive in the Beverly Crest neighborhood.St. Louis (8)Missouri134A woman was killed and two adults and a 17-year-old were injured near the former ABB manufacturing plant. The plant was the scene of a mass shooting in 2010.Hartford (2)Connecticut156A man was killed and five others injured after an early morning shooting at a large gathering at a warehouse.New York City (13)New York044Four people were wounded after a shooter opened fire on a large crowd watching a basketball game at St. Mary's Park in the Bronx.Philadelphia (13)Pennsylvania 044Four women were injured with gun fire in the early morning. A fifth woman was stabbed multiple times.Newark (1)New Jersey055Four adults and a 10-year-old child were wounded after multiple heavily armed shooters opened fire on males in a specific block.Chicago (33)Illinois145A man was killed and four others, two men and two women, were injured at a backyard BBQ. Responding officers arrested two men fleeing from the scene.PointblankTexas235Two men were killed and two adults and an infant were injured. A man entered a home where a child's birthday party was ongoing and opened fire. Two guests returned fire and were among the injured.Denver (3)Colorado145A 16-year-old was killed and three adults and a girl were wounded at a large gathering in the Westwood neighborhood.Montgomery (2)Alabama044Four men were injured after a shooting at an entrance to I-85 South.Philadelphia (12)Pennsylvania134A woman was killed and three men were wounded in an evening shooting.Miami GardensFlorida055Five men were wounded after a potentially gang related shooting occurred behind a U-Gas Station. A witness likened the amount of gunfire to the Iraq war.Tampa (1)Florida 055A man opened fire at a gas station while screaming at passersby. He wounded five people before he was arrested.Detroit (6)Michigan044Three men and a woman were injured while standing outside and a person opened fire from a car.St. Louis (7)Missouri314Three men were killed and a third injured after an afternoon dispute escalated between two groups of people.ElyriaOhio505A man killed his wife and three children, aged 12, 10 and 6-years-old, and then himself in an apparent murder-suicide.Wilmington (2)Delaware224A 17-year-old and a woman were killed and two men were injured in a shooting.Milwaukee (6)Wisconsin044Four men were injured in the evening.Federal WayWashington134A 17-year-old was killed and two adults and a 12-year-old injured at Steel Lake Park. A woman reportedly opened fire after an argument.Chicago (32)Illinois145Five people were sitting on a porch in the evening when one was killed and four injured in a drive-by shooting.MagnoliaArkansas044Four people were injured in the early morning after at least two semi-automatic handguns were fired at a large house party.Mont EnterpriseTexas044Four people were injured shortly after midnight when someone opened fire during the Rude Boyz Annual Trail Ride. The gathering was held at Durango's Canyon.Flint TownshipMichigan134One person was killed and three others were injured when two men opened fire in a restaurant. One man was charged with open murder, three counts of assault with intent to murder and multiple weapons charges. The other man was charged with careless discharge of a firearm.2 men charged in Flint Township diner shooting that left 1 dead, 3 wounded The Flint Journal via MLive.com, July 30, 2020Commerce (1)Colorado134Responding officers to a large gathering in the early morning found a man dead. Three additional victims were transported in private vehicles to the hospital.Louisville (5)Kentucky134Officers responded to I-64 West in the early morning after calls of shots fired by a moving vehicle. They found four individuals shot, with one dead, in a crashed car. A fifth individual was wounded when the car crashed.Raleigh (1)North Carolina044A woman and three men were wounded near a local restaurant.MantecaCalifornia077Officers responded from a traffic stop after hearing gunfire. They discovered seven people wounded at a large house party after a man armed with a semi-automatic weapon arrived and opened fire.FlintMichigan066Six people were shot at a party of over 1,000 people following the filming of a music video in a parking lot.Weekend shootings in Flint leave 12 people injured The Flint Journal via MLive.com, July 26, 2020Miami (1)Florida134A seven-year-old girl, a sixteen-month boy and two adults were shot by a passing vehicle while getting out of a car. The girl was declared brain dead at the hospital, causing the shooting to be declared a homicide.Denver (2)Colorado235Two men were killed and two woman and a man were wounded in the Park Hill neighborhood.Dallas (2)Texas044Three men and a woman were injured shortly before midnight. A man was denied entry at a local bar, retrieved an assault-type weapon from his car, and shot into the building.Atlanta (7)Georgia224Two adults were killed and two teenagers, aged seventeen and eighteen, were injured in an early morning shooting. The group were ambushed by two shooters after arriving at an AirBnb house party in a rideshare.Henrico CountyVirginia134One man was killed and three others injured in the early morning. Officers are investigating if the individuals were a part of an announced party for that night.PetersburgVirginia044Four people were wounded in an early morning shooting.Chicago (31)Illinois246Two people were killed and four injured while standing on the sidewalk in the West Pullman area of the Far South Side.WarrenMichigan044A man opened fire and others returned fire at a large party with at least one hundred people in attendance. Four people were injured in the shooting.Chicago (30)Illinois01515Fifteen people were injured, four critically, after a shooter opened fire at people leaving a funeral home in Chicago's Auburn Gresham neighborhood."Chicago Police Release New Details on Shootout at Funeral That Wounded 15 People", NBC 5 Chicago. July 22, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020.Chicago (29)Illinois055Five people were wounded in the North Lawndale neighborhood. They were a part of people gathered on the sidewalk when a car pulled up and several men got out and opened fire.Richmond (2)Virginia145One man was killed and four others injured after a fight in a McDonald's parking lot escalated. One of the injured was an innocent bystander in the Food Lion parking lot across the street.Peoria (2)Illinois01313Thirteen people were injured in an early morning shooting at a riverfront gathering. An argument between two women led to a man firing two shots into the air. This led to multiple individuals opening fire on the crowd.OmahaNebraska088Eight people including a fifteen-year-old girl were injured in a drive by shooting early in the morning.Chicago (28)Illinois235Two people were killed and three wounded shortly before midnight in Morgan Park on the Far South Side. They were part of a group of people, that were fired upon by  an unknown shooter.Washington, D.C. (5)Washington, D.C.189Police responding to reports of a shooting discovered one man killed and eight other adults wounded.Detroit (5)Michigan 044Two fifteen-year-olds and two seventeen-year-olds were wounded while sitting in traffic when another car pulled up and opened fire. Four days later, the suspect was shot by police after a pursuit in which he was found holding a gun and died at a hospital.Suspect in weekend quadruple shooting fatally wounded by Detroit police officer WJBK (Fox 2), July 24, 2020Detroit (4)Michigan314A man opened fire in a restaurant, killing three men and injuring another. The shooter has been taken into custody.Suspect in custody after 3 killed, 1 injured in late-night Detroit Coney Island shooting Detroit Free Press, July 20, 2020Chicago (27)Illinois145A man was killed and four others wounded after two men opened fire in the early morning in the North Lawndale neighborhood. The men were standing on a street corner.Columbus (2)Ohio044Four adults were wounded while attending a memorial in Weinland Park. A three-year-old girl was also wounded when bullets struck the home she was in.MadisonFlorida044Three adults and a child were injured after a man, out on bond from a January arrest, entered their home and opened fire.Nashville (1)Tennessee055Eight or nine people opened fire in the early morning in a drive-by shooting. Five people were wounded, including a juvenile.New York City (12)New York156Two gunmen opened fire in the early morning outside a Brooklyn apartment building. A man was killed and five other adults were wounded.Shreveport (2)Louisiana134A man was killed and two adults and an 11-year-old child were injured after an argument escalated from an original argument at a basketball court.St. JosephMissouri055Five men were injured while standing in a park after a vehicle drove by and opened fire.DurhamNorth Carolina088Six adults and two children aged four and eight-years-old were wounded after someone opened fire at a party outside a home.New York City (11)New York066Multiple shooters traveled across three different blocks and wounded six people in Brooklyn.Louisville (4)Kentucky134A 16-year-old was killed and three others, including two juveniles, were wounded at a gas station.KentWashington066Five adults and a teenager were wounded after an argument escalated at a Metro bus stop.ComoMississippi235Two people were killed and three injured at a large outdoor hip hop concert in which potentially five separate guns were used. An additional three people were injured while attempting to flee, after being hit by cars.Baton Rouge (3)Louisiana178A man was killed and seven others injured in an early morning shooting outside an Exxon gas station.LansingMichigan055Three women and two men were injured after someone opened fire outside an apartment complex. At the complex there was a large party happening with over 100 people present.New York City (10)New York134Two men opened fire on a late night cookout at the Raymond Bush Playground in Brooklyn. Three men were injured and an infant sitting in a stroller was killed.Fort Lauderdale (2)Florida224Two men were killed in an early morning shooting at a party, with two others wounded.Chicago (26)Illinois134A man was killed and two other men and a woman were wounded in Englewood in the evening.Chicago (25)Illinois145Four men were wounded and one killed in an early morning shooting. The group was standing in the street when a verbal altercation escalated with at least two shooters.Rochester (1)New York066Responding officers to an early morning block party arrived to gunfire. Two wounded individuals were identified at the party and four others were identified at local hospitals.Wilmington (1)Delaware055Four teenagers aged between 15 and 13-years-old and 10-year-old child were wounded. Someone opened fire on a playground late at night.Paterson (2)New Jersey437In a late night shooting, four people were killed and three injured. Officers suspect the shooting was retaliation by people recently released from prison.AlexandriaVirginia055Shortly after midnight an individual stormed an apartment and wounded a man and four teenagers aged 14 to 19-years-old.Chicago (24)Illinois066Shots were fired into a group of people in the Auburn Gresham area on the South Side. The evening shooting wounded six.Detroit (3)Michigan246Two men were killed and four others - two men and two women - were injured in a shooting at a late-night party.2 killed, 4 injured in shooting during Detroit gathering WDIV, July 5, 2020Houston (8)Texas044Three men waiting at a stop light and were wounded when someone opened fire. Comedian Rickey Smiley's daughter was a passenger in another vehicle and was also wounded.Chicago (23)Illinois044A 16-year-old girl and three adults were wounded by gunfire while standing in an alley in the West Side's Fifth City neighborhood in the early morning.Davenport (2)Iowa134Officers arrived at an early morning fight and heard shots being fired. They later discovered a man killed by the gunfire and three others injured.Greenville (SC)South Carolina2810At least two people are killed and eight injured, four critically, at a nightclub. No suspects have been arrested.2 dead, 8 others injured in shooting at Lavish Lounge in Greenville County, deputies say WYFF, July 5, 2020New York City (9)New York055Four adults and a 15-year-old boy were injured in an early morning shooting in Inwood, Manhattan.HelenaArkansas134A man was killed and three others injured in a parking lot, after leaving an event held by rapper Bankroll Freddie. People were leaving the event when someone fired into the crowd.Milwaukee (5)Wisconsin044Shortly after midnight three men and one woman were injured.CambridgeMaryland044Four people were wounded in an early morning shooting, with potentially multiple weapons used.Atlanta (6)Georgia21214A large group of people were watching fireworks, when a fight broke out after a car hit a pedestrian. Fourteen people were wounded, of which two were declared dead at the hospital.Chicago (22)Illinois156A woman was killed and five men were wounded in an early morning drive-by shooting. The group was setting off fireworks when the car approached.EphrataPennsylvania044A 20-year-old opened fire on a group of six people after getting into an altercation and taking a rifle from his father. Four of the group were injured and the 20-year-old and his father were arrested.ColumbiaMissouri235An adult and 11-year-old girl were killed shortly after midnight, three others were wounded. Officers believe that there were two shooters.FreeportIllinois156Shortly after midnight a man was killed and five others were wounded.Barnwell CountySouth Carolina055Five teenagers were wounded shortly after midnight after a shooting occurred at a house party.Greenville (Ms)Mississippi044A group of people were traveling in a party bus, when someone opened fire on the vehicle. Four people in the bus were wounded.Temple HillsMaryland134Four men were wounded in Marlow Heights, one man later died at the hospital.Baton Rouge (2)Louisiana044Two adults and two children were injured in a drive-by shooting.Atlanta (5)Georgia055A group of people were fired at by an individual in a vehicle, shortly before midnight. Five people were wounded.Jackson (Ms) (4)Mississippi134An early morning shooting occurred at a nightclub, after an altercation escalated. One person was killed and three others wounded.Chicago (21)Illinois134A man was killed and three others injured in a late night shooting in South Chicago.Chicago (20)Illinois448Four people are killed, and at least four more were injured at an outdoor gathering in Englewood when four men opened fire into a crowd. No suspects have been arrested.4 dead, 4 others injured in shooting at Englewood in Chicago County Sun Times Media, July 5, 2020Lynn (1)Massachusetts145A man was killed and four others injured at a July 4 cookout.Baltimore (5)Maryland044Four women were injured in a late night shooting in southwest Baltimore.HooverAlabama134A suspected shootout occurred inside the Riverchase Galleria in the afternoon. An 8-year-old boy was killed and two adults and a girl were injured.Delano (2)California235A group of five were shot after a man got out of a vehicle and opened fire. Two girls were killed aged 11 and 12-years-old and three adults were wounded.Somerville (Ma)Massachusetts044A man and three women were wounded in a late night shooting, the next day three suspects were arrested.Paterson (1)New Jersey145A man was killed and four others injured shortly after midnight on a street corner.Oakland (1)California044Three men and a woman were wounded in their vehicle on Interstate 580.Boston (2)Massachusetts134Officers responding to a call of shots fired discovered four wounded individuals. A man later died at the hospital.Davenport (1)Iowa055Five men were wounded in an evening shooting. Officers believed the shooting was targeted at the group.Atlanta (4)Georgia145Early in the morning, a group of men sitting on the sidewalk were shot at in a drive-by. One man was killed and four injured.Chicago (19)Illinois044Shortly after midnight three men and a woman were shot while waiting in a vehicle at a Shell gas station in River North neighborhood. The shooter was in and later fled in a red sedan.Dayton (1)Ohio044Three men and one women were all wounded in a shooting.GreenbrierArkansas044Three adults and one juvenile were wounded, after going to a residence and getting into an altercation. The shooter was a juvenile resident of the home.Los Angeles (3)California044Four men were wounded in a public park in Sylmar in a drive-by shooting.Sioux FallsSouth Dakota134A man shot and killed another man in a home, after mistaking it as the home of his intended target. He left and entered the correct home and wounded three others.Philadelphia (11)Pennsylvania224Two men were killed and two injured in a late night shooting in the Kensington neighborhood.SawyervilleAlabama077During an early morning field party, seven people were wounded after an argument between two men escalated.Red BluffCalifornia246Red Bluff shooting. An employee was killed and four injured at a Walmart distribution center. The perpetrator was later killed in a shootout with responding police.Peoria (1)Illinois044Officers responding to an early morning ShotSpotter alert found two men wounded and identified two women who arrived at the hospital to be a part of the incident.New York City (8)New York044Early in the morning a man opened fire at a house party in Brooklyn, and injured four people.Chicago (18)Illinois134A man was killed and three others wounded after a large gathering in Douglas.BlythevilleArkansas314A Missouri man traveled to the area for a house party, where a couple got into a physical domestic fight. Shortly after 911 was called in response to that fight the man opened fire and killed his Uncle and two others, and wounded another.Aurora (2)Colorado055Five people were wounded by a shooter outside a local grocery store. Officers previously thought the incident was a gunfight but later announced it was one shooter.FresnoCalifornia044Four people were wounded at a house party shortly before midnight, after two shooters appeared near a neighboring home.Phoenix (1)Arizona044Three adults and a 14-year-old boy were wounded in the early morning at a gas station. Prior to the shooting, a large crowd of people and cars had been gathered around the gas station.Philadelphia (10)Pennsylvania044Four men were wounded after a shooting at an intersection in the Kensington neighborhood.Bridgeport (2)Connecticut134A man was killed, and two adults and a 17-year-old injured while attempting to make a rap music video. Officers believed the shooting was targeted, as the victims refused to cooperate.Jackson (Tn) (1)Tennessee044Three adults and one juvenile were wounded in an early morning shooting. The suspected shooter was arrested.Chicago (17)Illinois044Four people were wounded in a drive by shooting in Burnside, while standing on a porch.Lake Worth BeachFlorida055Five people were wounded in a drive-by shooting during the evening. Responding police believed the shooter and victims know each other.San Francisco (1)California055Police discovered five men wounded by gunfire in the Tenderloin neighborhood.Charlotte (2)North Carolina369Officers responding to a block party on reports of someone being hit by a car arrived to shots being fired. Three people were killed and six injured by gunfire, with an additional five injured after being hit by cars while attempting to flee.Minneapolis (4)Minnesota044Officers responding to a shooting on West Broadway Avenue discovered four people injured.Minneapolis (3)Minnesota044Four people were wounded in the Willard-Hay neighborhood during the afternoon.Chicago (16)Illinois055Five people were wounded in a drive-by, including a 16-year-old girl, at an early morning gathering in East Garfield Park.Chicago (15)Illinois044Four people were wounded early in the morning after an individual opened fire from a vehicle in the Back of the Yards neighborhood on the South Side.New York City (7)New York055Five people were shot during a vigil in the Crown Heights area of Brooklyn in the evening.Buffalo (1)New York044Four men were wounded after a shooting at an early morning gathering of cars.AustinTexas055Five people were wounded in an early morning shooting.Milwaukee (4)Wisconsin145Early in the morning a shooting occurred at a house party. Five individuals were shot and one died on the way to the hospital in a private vehicle.AuburnAlabama044Shortly after midnight, officers responded to a home after a complaint of gunshots. They discovered four men wounded.Chicago (14)Illinois134An argument in Humboldt Park escalated shortly after midnight. A man was killed and three wounded.Minneapolis (2)Minnesota11112A group of people fired into a crowd, killing one and injuring 11 others.One dead, 11 injured in Minneapolis shooting NBC News, June 21, 2020SyracuseNew York099Officers arrived at a large party in a public parking lot after reports of a stolen car was made. An individual opened fire as they arrived and injured nine people including a 17-year-old.New York City (6)New York044Three women and a man were injured after a fight broke out between two groups gathered at Claremont park.Detroit (2)Michigan044Four people were wounded in a drive-by shooting in the evening.Saginaw (3)Michigan134A woman sitting in her car was killed and three others injured in a separate car early in the morning. A shoot-out had occurred in a large gathering nearby.PinetopsNorth Carolina224Early in the morning two people were killed and two wounded in a shooting.Jersey CityNew Jersey145One person was killed and four injured shortly after midnight.WichitaKansas055Five people were shot at a motel after a party in one of the rooms had an argument that escalated. Police believe the shooting was intended to be targeted.New York City (5)New York044Four people were wounded at an overnight park party in the Bronx after an argument escalated.JanesvilleWisconsin044Officers responding to a shots fired call in the early morning found four people wounded at an adult entertainment venue.Albany (NY) (1)New York077Early in the morning a man was discovered by officers with a gunshot wound. Shortly after transporting the man to the hospital, six other victims were identified at local hospitals to be a part of the same shooting.Chicago (13)Illinois044Three adults and a nine-year-old child were wounded while standing in an apartment complex parking lot in the Gresham neighborhood. A man walked up and opened fire on the group, resulting in a shoot out.Fort DodgeIowa224In an apparent shoot out at a birthday party, one man was killed and two women injured. A second man died in his vehicle while attempting to drive away from the scene with a gunshot wound.Decatur (2)Illinois044An early morning shooting during a block party injured four people. The suspected shooter was arrested after a local traffic stop.Chicago (12)Illinois044A 15-year-old and three adults were gathered outside an apartment when they were injured in a drive-by shooting in the Montclare neighborhood.Minneapolis (1)Minnesota167Early in the morning six people were wounded and one was killed in an incident. Officers were alerted via a ShotSpotter activation.Louisville (3)Kentucky145About 100 people were gathered at a skate park in the early morning when someone opened fire. One person was killed and four injured.Lake Charles (2)Louisiana044Four people were wounded in an early morning shooting at a local night club. A suspected shooter was arrested.Lafayette (2)Louisiana055Officers responded to an early morning shooting and found five people wounded. All but one were transported to local hospitals.New Orleans (3)Louisiana134One man was killed and three others injured during the evening.HesperiaCalifornia055Over 100 people attended a house party when someone opened fire, injuring five people.RisonArkansas044Shortly before midnight, four individuals were wounded in a shooting.St. Louis (6)Missouri156Five individuals were wounded and one killed during an early morning shooting in the JeffVanderLou neighborhood.WyandanchNew York178One person was killed and seven others wounded after a shooting at a house party. Local police believe the incident is gang related.Atlanta (3)Georgia 257An individual shot at a large group of people from a vehicle, killing two people and wounding five.Baltimore (4)Maryland055Five people were wounded in the Fells Point neighborhood during a large gathering at Broadway Square with many of the crowd drinking alcoholic drinks.Washington, D.C. (4)Washington, D.C.257Shortly before midnight responding officers discovered seven shooting victims. A man and woman later died at local hospitals with five other men wounded.Philadelphia (9)Pennsylvania066Early in the morning five men and one woman were wounded after multiple men opened fire on a group in the Tioga neighborhood, causing the group to scatter and run away.New York City (4)New York134A 19-year-old woman was killed and a man and a two teenagers wounded at a local park in the Bronx late at night.San Antonio (4)Texas088A man denied entry into a bar for being too drunk, stated "Don't you know who I am?" to the bouncer before leaving. He returned later with a rifle and opened fire injuring five women and three men.Richmond (1)Virginia044Shortly after midnight responding officers discovered two men wounded by gunfire. Another man and a woman were taken to the hospital in private vehicles.MonroeLouisiana606A mother killed her neighbor, and four children aged 12, 8, and 5-years-old and a 5-month-old infant, before committing suicide in a murder-suicide.Washington, D.C. (3)Washington, D.C.077Seven people including two juveniles were wounded in the Trinidad neighborhood of DC. Officers discovered the victims after hearing gunshots in the early morning.Houston (7)Texas246Two men were killed, and three men and a 13-year-old were wounded in a drive-by shooting while standing in an apartment complex parking lot.Sacramento (2)California134Shortly before midnight, officers discovered three adults men and one juvenile boy wounded by gunfire. One adult man died later at the hospital.Paso RoblesCalifornia257A man shot and killed an individual and wounded an officer, responding officers killed the suspect and three officers were wounded after a short manhunt.Toledo (1)Ohio134Early in the morning ShotSpotter alerts caused officers to respond to a graduation party. One 18-year-old was killed and with three others wounded.Scotland NeckNorth Carolina055Four adults and a six-year-old child were wounded in a drive-by shooting at a home and vehicle.VallejoCalifornia235Two women were killed and two adults and a 10-year-old child were injured at a child's birthday party late at night.Philadelphia (8)Pennsylvania167Just before midnight, a shootout occurred in an apartment complex in the Northern Liberties neighborhood. Six people were wounded and a man was found dead behind some cars near the complex.Memphis (6)Tennessee044A home was shot at first then after police investigated the shooters return and opened fire. Four people were injured in the second shooting including an 18-month-old infant.New York City (3)New York044A woman, two men and a 17-year-old were wounded after an argument escalated in Brooklyn. The shooter fled the scene.DyersburgTennessee055Five people were wounded inside the local American Legion club in the early morning. All individuals are refusing to speak with police.Chicago (11)Illinois134Officers responding to a shots fired call discovered four wounded victims. One victim later died at the hospital and the other three are uncooperative with investigators.Chicago (10)Illinois066Six men were wounded in a late night drive by shooting while standing on the sidewalk.SikestonMissouri279Two women were killed and seven other individuals wounded at a house party after a drive-by shooting early in the morning.HopeArkansas066Six people between 15 and 21-years-old were wounded in the early morning during an social gathering. A seventh individual broke her leg running from the gunfire.Sacramento (1)California145One person was killed and four people were wounded near a house party after an altercation escalated.IrontonOhio044Four men were injured after a fight between a large number of people escalated in a local bar's parking lot.Kansas City (3)Missouri145An argument escalated in the early morning with at least two individuals opening fire. One man died and four others were wounded.Denver (1)Colorado044Four people were wounded in an early morning shooting. A juvenile was later arrested in connection with the shooting.ValhermosoAlabama707Shortly before midnight authorities responded to a home fire. Once the fire was extinguished seven adults were discovered dead by gunshot wounds.RacineWisconsin055Three teenagers and two adults aged between 18 and 20-years-old were wounded at a local beach. Officials do not think there is a connection between it and the protests that occurred that night.Dallas (1)Texas134Four people were wounded after two gunman opened fire in a bar. A female victim later died at the hospital.Chicago (9)Illinois044Four males were wounded while standing on the sidewalk after the shooter approached them and open fire.St. Louis (5)Missouri044Four St. Louis police officers were wounded during an altercation with protestors near police headquarters.Saginaw (2)Michigan066Six people were shot when a man opened fire on a block party. The suspect has not been apprehended.6 shot during Saginaw block party WJRT-TV (ABC 12), May 31, 2020Philadelphia (7)Pennsylvania044A 12-year-old and three adults were wounded in a shooting in the Kensington section of the city.GulfportMississippi156An 18-year-old was killed and five others injured after someone opened fire early in the morning at a large gathering of people.HiawathaIowa134Four people were shot at a mobile home park; three were hospitalized, and one pronounced dead at the scene.AlthaFlorida156One person was killed and five injured including a law enforcement officer, at a birthday party at a local dragstrip.Gastonia (1)North Carolina156Six people were shot in the early morning at a block party after multiple individuals opened fire. One of the victims later died at the hospital.Houston (6)Texas145One person was killed and four wounded including two and 12-year-old children, during a block party.PortsmouthVirginia055Five individuals were wounded in a shooting, including a 10-year-old boy. All victims left the scene for the hospital via private vehicles, while police were called to the scene.Philadelphia (6)Pennsylvania134Two men approached four people sitting on their porch and opened fire in the evening. A man was killed and two others and a woman were injured.Memphis (5)Tennessee044A road rage incident near I-240 wounded two children and two adults.Louisville (2)Kentucky077Seven people were injured in a shooting during a protest against police brutality in the aftermath of the death of Breonna Taylor, two seriously.Boston (1)Massachusetts145Five men were found by responding police with gunshot wounds. One later died at the hospital.Cleveland (4)Ohio134Four people were wounded outside of a gas station, in the early morning. One of the victims later died at the hospital.San Jose (1)California055A group of five men were wounded outside an apartment complex by a shooter before the individual fled on foot.Philadelphia (5)Pennsylvania044Four men were shot and wounded in a drive-by shooting in the morning and all taken to the hospital in private vehicles.VicksburgMississippi044Shortly after midnight four people aged between 16 and 27 were shot in a Waffle House parking lot.Los Angeles (2)California055Five people were wounded in a shooting outside an apartment complex, ranging in age from mid-teens to early 20s.Philadelphia (4)Pennsylvania044Four people were wounded in a late night shooting.Chicago (8)Illinois224A man selling items on a street corner was shot and killed in a drive-by shooting. A pedestrian was also killed while two others were wounded.BowmanSouth Carolina358A drive-by shooting at a neighborhood cookout in the early morning resulted in three individuals dead and five injured.Lake Charles (1)Louisiana066A 17-year-old shooter and others engaged in a shootout at a graduation party, three 15-year-olds, a 16-year-old, and a 17-year-old were all injured along with the shooter.Jackson (Ms) (2)Mississippi145A man was shot and later died at the hospital, while four others, including the suspect, were wounded after a shooting at a private residence.St. Louis (4)Missouri044Four people were shot in the early morning at an intersection.DanvilleAlabama314Police responding to calls about gunshots found three people dead and one injured at a private residence.Myrtle Beach (1)South Carolina044Four people were wounded shortly after midnight in a potential gang related shooting. Six people have been arrested in connection.Washington, D.C. (2)Washington, D.C.134Officers responding to a shooting found four individuals who were transported to the hospital. One victim died later at the hospital.Rock Island (1)Illinois145A man was killed and four others injured after a large gathering on a street had a fight escalate into a shooting.JonesvilleSouth Carolina257A man and 17-year-old were killed and five others wounded at a block party after the state's quarantine order was lifted.Charlotte (1)North Carolina066Six people were shot in a parking lot after an argument escalated.Mount Morris TownshipMichigan134A shooting left one dead and three in critical condition. No suspects have been arrested and the investigation is ongoing.Saturday night shooting in Mount Morris leaves 1 dead and 3 in critical condition MLive.com, May 24, 2020Chicago (7)Illinois134A shooter pulled up outside a home and opened fire on four men standing on the porch. One was killed and three injured.DaytonaFlorida066Two people were shot and four others wounded by bullet fragments after a shooter opened fire on a crowded beach.Fort Lauderdale (1)Florida055Five men were wounded outside a Jamaican restaurant in the early morning. All were brought to the hospital by private vehicles and have refused to cooperate with police.Houston (5)Texas044A fight escalated at a bar, with the perpetrator leaving the bar and driving to the back of the bar and opening fire, wounding four men.Cleveland (3)Ohio134A man was killed and three other individuals wounded after shots were fired near a local deli in the early morning.Houston (4)Texas235A man shot and killed his pregnant ex-girlfriend and wounded her sister, mother, and boyfriend before committing suicide after being surrounding by police.Decatur (1)Illinois055Five men were wounded shortly after midnight.Bakersfield (2)California055Five teenagers, aged 18 and 17-years-old, were wounded after a man fired into the apartment from outside the complex.CharlestonSouth Carolina044Three people were wounded when an individual opened fire at a party that was hosted at a short term rental. A fourth wounded individual was walking her dog near the home.District HeightsMaryland134Police responded to a suspected shooting and found an 18-year-old dead on the sidewalk. Three injured victims were identified later.St. MatthewsSouth Carolina415A mother and her 15 and 12-year-old daughters were shot and killed by her husband who wounded another daughter before killing himself in a murder-suicide. Another daughter was uninjured and ran for help.BogalusaLouisiana01313Hundreds of people had gathered for a memorial service when multiple shooters began firing wounding thirteen people.Albuquerque (3)New Mexico05Including an unborn child5Police responding to a call of shots fired discovered five individuals wounded, including a pregnant woman after an argument had escalated.Rockford (2)Illinois145One person was killed and four injured in a believed targeted shooting at a gas station.GarrisonKentucky145Six people were involved in the repossession of a vehicle and one opened fire killing one and injuring four.Montgomery (1)Alabama044Police responding to a call about a gunshot victim discovered one victim with the other three transported to the hospital via private vehicle.KatyTexas066A dispute between two neighbors escalated causing five people to be wounded, including a five-year-old girl.Baton Rouge (1)Louisiana055Multiple gunmen were involved in a shootout at a local food market, wounding five including a minor.Fort Worth (1)Texas055Five people were wounded in a public park where hundreds were gathered, with some reporting the gunfire was fireworks.St. Louis (3)Missouri044Four people were wounded during a late night shooting.Baltimore (3)Maryland044Four men were discovered shot on the city's west side in the evening.Memphis (4)Tennessee224Two men were shot and killed in a vehicle; two others wounded after attempting to exit the vehicle and were shot at in a drive-by.Albany (Ga.) (1)Georgia134A 16-year-old was killed and three others wounded in a vehicle after the car was shot multiple times in the early morning.HammondIndiana134A man was killed and three others wounded after an incident of road rage escalated.Columbus (1)Ohio044Four people were wounded after an individual opened fire at a house party.Jacksonville (2)Florida044A man drove up to a street and after exiting the car fired at least 30 shots into a crowd of people wounding four men.Chicago (6)Illinois055Five teenagers - aged 15 through 19 years old - were injured in a drive-by shooting after attending a large gathering.Philadelphia (3)Pennsylvania044A man and three women were injured in a shooting in the evening.Indianapolis (2)Indiana044Four people were wounded in a shooting that involved two vehicles and an additional four people near Perry Park.Milwaukee (3)Wisconsin505Five people were killed in a home, aged between 14 and 41, with a child being uninjured in the violence. Police are treating the incident as a matter of family violence.Salisbury (2)North Carolina145One individual was killed and four others - including a juvenile - were injured after a fight escalated into a shooting.Troy (NY)New York044Four people were wounded in the cities South End in an early morning shooting.JolietIllinois134One person was killed and three others injured, with one being 17-years-old, in an early morning shooting.Memphis (3)Tennessee077Seven people were discovered wounded after police responded to an aggravated assault call. The individuals were wounded in a drive-by shooting after heading to an early morning party.Orlando (2)Florida145An 18-year-old athlete who was to play at University of Louisville was killed and four others injured in a late night shooting.Fort WayneIndiana044Police responding to a shots fired call found four people injured.Houston (3)Texas314Three people were killed and one injured in an apartment by two shooters. Due to the lack of forced entry the victims may have known the shooters.HyattsvilleMaryland224Two men were killed and two injured in a late night shooting.Springfield (Ma)Massachusetts145One man was killed and four others injured after multiple individuals opened fire on a backyard gathering before fleeing in a car and continuing to fire.Greensboro (2)North Carolina134Responding police discovered three adults and a juvenile injured by a shooting. An adult later died in the hospital.Jackson (Ms) (1)Mississippi134A five-year-old girl was killed and three adults wounded after someone shot into an apartment.Bakersfield (1)California066One juvenile and five adults were wounded after at a large party at an apartment complex was fired upon by at least four shooters.MuskegonMichigan044Police were alerted of shots fired shortly after midnight and arrived to find the suspect had fled and the four wounded had transported themselves to the hospital.Detroit (1)Michigan044One man and three women were injured after an altercation escalated. A male shooter escaped the scene and a female was arrested for pointing a weapon at one of the wounded.Anchorage (1)Alaska044Police responding to a call of shots fired found one person wounded and an additional three connected to the shooting were found in local hospitals.GreenwoodSouth Carolina134A 19-year-old was killed and three others individuals were wounded at an apartment complex.Chicago (5)Illinois134One man was killed and three other individuals wounded, including a 5-year-old, after an individual exited an alley way and opened fire on the group. One of the group likely returned fire at the shooter.New York City (2)New York044Four men were wounded in an early morning shooting in a Brooklyn apartment.LancasterSouth Carolina145One man was killed and four other individuals were wounded in a drive-by shooting in which people standing outside a house and sitting in a car were fired upon.Los Angeles (1)California134One man was killed and two other men and one woman were injured in an afternoon shooting.VidorTexas044Police officers responding to a shots fired call found four wounded individuals, with the shooter arrested later.LubbockTexas224Police responding to a shots fired call found an adult male and a teenage female deceased and two seriously wounded individuals.HialeahFlorida145A man shot and wounded his ex-girlfriend's relatives before barricading himself with her and their 9-year-old child in the home. During the standoff an officer was wounded along with the ex-girlfriend, while the man was killed by police.Louisville (1)Kentucky044Police responding to calls about a shooting discovered two people wounded and a further two wounded drove themselves to the hospital.Macon (1)Georgia314A domestic argument escalated when a man shot and killed his child's mother, step-father, and sister before abducting his two-year-old child. The shooter was arrested and the child recovered after an Amber Alert was issued.Philadelphia (2)Pennsylvania055Five people were wounded at a late night memorial gathering after a man fired into the crowd from half-a-block away. The wounded included a two-year-old, a fourteen-year-old, and an eighteen-year-old.Atlanta (2)Georgia044Four people were wounded in a late night shooting, with two of the wounded under the age of 18. One of the wounded was also showing signs of the COVID-19 virus.Baltimore (2)Maryland134One man was killed and two others and a teenager wounded in a drive-by shooting by three shooters.San Antonio (3)Texas044Four people in a car were wounded by shooter in the early morning. Three of the victims had transported themselves to hospitals prior to police arrival. The victim found by officers knew who had shot him, but refused to cooperate with police questions.HanahanSouth Carolina044Four people were injured in an early morning shooting.Norfolk (1)Virginia044Four people were discovered to be wounded in a shooting after police received a report about a shooting.St. Louis (2)Missouri044Three men and a woman were shot and wounded leaving a bar early in the morning. A second woman was injured by the crowd fleeing the scene.Jacksonville (1)Florida145Five people were shot by a man wearing all black and potentially a face mask and one individual died at the scene. One of the wounded is a three-year-old child.Baltimore (1)Maryland077Police reported that seven people were injured during a police involved shooting. None of those wounded were police officers.Springfield (Mo)Missouri527A shooter killed four people, including a police officer, and injured two others, including another police officer, before committing suicide at a gas station.5 killed, including officer, in Missouri gas station shooting  Gray News, March 16, 2020MoncureNorth Carolina707Seven adult members of the same family were killed in an apparent murder suicide and were discovered after reports of shots fired.Saginaw (1)Michigan224Police responding to a shooting found three women and one man injured. Two women later were declared deceased.Albuquerque (2)New Mexico134Reportedly a group of young men burst into a home and started shooting early in the morning. They wounded a woman, a 16-year-old girl and a 17-year-old girl and killed an adult male.New Orleans (2)Louisiana055Four men riding in a vehicle shot and wounded five people, including a 15-year-old boy, in a drive by shooting, in the Algiers neighborhood.Rockford (1)Illinois044Three men and one woman were wounded after another man opened fire inside of an apartment. The man was later arrested by police.ChesterPennsylvania224Police responding to a shooting discovered two 15-year-old boys killed and a third juvenile injured. A fourth wounded juvenile involved in the shooting was later identified at a medical center.CeresCalifornia134Police responded to reports of a shooting and discovered three wounded individuals, one of whom later died. A fourth victim arrived at a hospital in a private vehicle.Milwaukee (2)Wisconsin134An early morning argument escalated and resulted in one man killed and three injured outside a local business.South HollandIllinois044Four men were wounded in a vehicle on Bishop Ford Freeway, after another vehicle's occupant(s) fired on them.RosedaleMaryland156A 13-year-old boy was killed, five others were wounded; a 14-year-old boy and girl, two 12-year-old boys and a 19-year-old man were wounded. The group was shot at in a parking lot after an altercation while attending a Triple Threat Elite Dance event.Cleveland (2)Ohio11718Seventeen people were wounded and one killed after a shootout between multiple motorcycle clubs after a fight at one of the club's headquarters caused many to be thrown out.Albuquerque (1)New Mexico044Three adults and one child were injured by a shooter while exiting a house party. The shooter was later arrested.Chicago (4)Illinois077Six men and a woman were injured in a drive-by shooting after leaving a house party after a fight broke out in the Greater Grand Crossing neighborhood.Washington, D.C. (1)Washington, D.C.066Four males, one female and a five-year-old child were discovered by police wounded in a drive-by shooting.TulareCalifornia156One was killed while five others were injured at a mass shooting during a celebration of life. The gunman is still at large.Kansas City (2)Missouri145Four people were injured and one person was fatally wounded at a shooting.BrightonColorado055Five people were wounded in a drive by shooting, before the perpetrators fled.Milwaukee (1)Wisconsin606Milwaukee brewery shooting: Five people were killed when a gunman opened fire at the local Molson Coors Beverage Company campus, where he had been employed. Afterwards, the gunman committed suicide.Chicago (3)Illinois145A shooting occurred at a convenience store in the Avalon Park neighborhood where four people were hurt and one person was killed. The four wounded victims were listed in serious-to-critical condition. It was reported  that three people, including two men and a woman, exited a vehicle and started firing inside the store. They fled in a white vehicle after the arrival of police.Lafayette (1)Louisiana066Six people were injured in a shooting at a business.Houston (2)Texas077Seven people were shot at a flea market where a dance event took place with adults and children. A suspect was arrested and charged with assault. None of the injured victims were critically wounded.ClarktonNorth Carolina314Three people were killed and one person was injured in a shooting. A suspect turned himself in to local authorities and was charged with three counts of murder and one count of attempted murder.CaldwellIdaho235Two people were fatally shot and three others, including a police officer, were wounded in a shooting at an apartment complex. The suspect was among the dead.Greensboro (1)North Carolina044Four men were sent to a hospital after police said there were wounded in a shooting in the street. No information about the whereabouts of the shooter were known.Orlando (1)Florida404A man killed his wife and two children before killing himself.A CBP employee killed his wife and two sons before fatally shooting himself, police say  CNN, February 21, 2020Philadelphia (1)Pennsylvania044A shooting occurred in the North Side of the city where four people were injured. Two of the victims were listed in critical condition while the two others were listed in stable condition. A suspect was apprehended and arrested by law enforcement.Port GibsonMississippi224Four students of Alcorn State University were involved in a shooting off campus, with two being killed and two others injured.PensacolaFlorida145One person was killed and four others were injured in a drive-by shooting. The injured victims were transported to the hospital and two of them were listed in serious condition.MidlandTexas134A shooting occurred at a bar where one victim was killed and three others were wounded.Hartford (1)Connecticut145One person was killed and four others were wounded in a shooting at a nightclub. The conditions of the injured are unknown.New Orleans (1)Louisiana044Four people, two men and two women, were wounded in a shooting blocks away from the city's Mardi Gras Parade route.Memphis (2)Tennessee077Seven people were wounded when an unknown shooter opened fire at a street race after an argument escalated. All were brought to the hospital via private vehicles.Chicago (2)Illinois066Three adults and three children were wounded in a shooting at a gathering in an apartment complex in the South Side of the city.DoverDelaware145One person was fatally shot and four others were wounded in a shooting. It was initially reported that three victims were injured but a fourth one was discovered later and refused medical treatment. The four victims suffered non life-threatening injuries.San Antonio (2)Texas044A heated argument turned violent between a man and a woman in front of a house which led to a shooting. Four people were injured as a result of the shooting and were each transported to a hospital. Three of them were listed in serious condition while the fourth was in stable condition. Two of the injured were charged afterwards.YoungstownOhio325Three people were killed and two others were injured in a shooting at a club. The conditions of the injured are unknown. According to police, one of the victims was found dead inside a car. At least one suspect is in custody.Houston (1)Texas134A 29-year-old rap artist was killed and three others were wounded in a shooting in North Houston. The wounded victims' conditions are unknown. The suspects are gang members according to the chief of police.WacoTexas134One man was killed and three others were wounded in a shooting outside and inside a home in Waco. Two of the victims were transported to a hospital by ambulance and were listed in critical condition. The third victim self applied to the hospital but his condition was unknown. Police believe that the motive behind the shooting is the sale of illicit drugs gone wrong.Indianapolis (1)Indiana404Four people were fatally shot on the Northeast section of the city. The victims are three males and one female and their ages are unknown yet. No suspects have been identified or arrested.Washington CountyMaine314Three people were killed and another was injured in the towns of Machias and Jonesboro.  A 63-year-old man has been charged with three counts of murder and one count of attempted murder in the case.GrapevineCalifornia156One person was killed and five others were injured from a shooting on a Greyhound bus heading from Los Angeles to San Francisco. The bus was traversing Tejon Pass on Interstate 5, near Lebec, California, and stopped in Grapevine after the shooting.PhiladelphiaMississippi044Police responded to a street location where multiple shots were fired. They found four victims, aged 18–45 years old, with bullet wounds. Three of the victims were transported by helicopter to a hospital. It is unknown what their conditions are. Police are trying to locate any suspects in the shooting.Union ParishLouisiana404A shooter shot and killed two members of a family and a friend of one of them inside a house. A third fled through a window uninjured and alerted the authorities. The shooter then committed suicide.Delano (1)California145One person was killed and four others were injured in a shooting incident that occurred in several locations. One of the injured is in critical condition while the other three are expected to recover. The shooting happened during a memorial gathering for a victim who previously passed away due to a traffic accident.Boynton Beach (1)Florida134A shooting left one victim dead and the other three injured in the 200 block of Northeast First Court.Shreveport (1)Louisiana044A shooting occurred at an apartment complex where four teens were injured. All four victims, aged 15–17 years old, suffered non-life-threatening injuries according to first responders.MercedCalifornia044Four teenagers were injured in a shooting on public streets. Three of the victims are listed in stable condition while the fourth is in critical condition. Police are interviewing witnesses for their investigation.Bridgeport (1)Connecticut044Four men were wounded outside the Golden Hill Street Courthouse while sitting in a car, in a drive-by shooting by multiple shooters.NewburghNew York314Four family members were shot at a home. Three of the victims are dead and the fourth victim, a child, is wounded and is in serious condition. The suspect was apprehended and arrested by the police.Cape GirardeauMissouri055Multiple shots were fired inside a business where five people were wounded in a shooting.Salisbury (1)North Carolina066Six people were injured by a shooting shortly after midnight, at a local restaurant. An additional three others were treated for non-gunfire related injuries.HartsvilleSouth Carolina369Three people were fatally shot and four others were injured at a bar.VanceboroNorth Carolina505A man shot and killed his wife and three children, aged between eight months and four years old, along with the family dog. He then killed himself.LisleIllinois224A woman killed one person and injured two others before killing herself at a cigar lounge. The victims were Illinois State Troopers.Authorities identify shooter and victims in Lisle cigar lounge shooting, including three Illinois State troopers Chicago Sun-Times, January 25, 2020Seattle (1)Washington178Eight people were shot, one fatally, outside a McDonald's on Pine Street in Downtown Seattle.Kansas City (1)Missouri2Including the perpetrator1517Two people (including the perpetrator) were killed and fifteen others were injured during a shooting at a nightclub.South HoustonTexas224Police discovered two people dead and two injured after responding to a shooting.Memphis (1)Tennessee145One person was killed and four others were injured during a shooting outside a nightclub.San Antonio (1)Texas257Two people were killed and five others injured at a nightclub.2 dead, 5 injured in shooting at music venue along San Antonio River Walk  KENS, January 19, 2020GrantsvilleUtah415Shooting of Haynie family: Four people were killed and one was injured after a teenager allegedly fired at his family at their house. He was charged with four counts of aggravated murder, one count of attempted aggravated murder and five counts of illegal discharge of a firearm.Chicago (1)Illinois055Three children between 11 and 16 years old were injured along with two adults after two perpetrators fired into a barber shop in the East Garfield Park neighborhood.Des MoinesIowa224Two people were killed and two injured after a shooting in a home's detached garage.Aurora (1)Colorado055Five people, including three teenagers, were wounded by a 16-year-old shooter at an apartment building.Bay Saint LouisMississippi224Two people were killed and two injured in a random ambush style shooting. The perpetrator was arrested after arriving at his mother's house covered in blood.Atlanta (1)Georgia044Four people were injured by a single person after an argument near a northwestern Atlanta nightclub early in the morning.OcalaFlorida134One man was killed and three men were injured in a mid morning shooting.New York City (1)New York044Four people were wounded in a drive-by shooting outside an apartment building in the Sunset Park neighborhood.St. Louis (1)Missouri314Responding police discovered three people dead and one wounded at an early morning shooting in the Benton Park neighborhood.Cleveland (1)Ohio044An argument in a Downtown Cleveland night club's VIP section led to three people being wounded and a fourth person was shot in the head in the back alley.HuntingtonWest Virginia077Seven people were wounded inside and out a hookah bar early in the morning, after an argument escalated.Trujillo AltoPuerto Rico415A family of four, including nine-year-old twin boys, were shot and killed at their home after celebrating New Year's Eve. A 16-year-old boy was seriously injured.

 Monthly statistics 

+2020 US Mass Shooting Statistics By MonthMonthMass ShootingsTotal number killedTotal number woundedOccurred at a school or universityOccurred at a place of worshipJanuary283911110February28409410March262711200April26239200May583724800June916239500July877138300August785134000September654427400October524121010November474719200DecemberTotal5874822,45130
The statistics columns for each month are updated after the month ends, in an effort to make sure the correct number of events, individuals affected, and descriptions are accurate. Thus, the number may be incomplete throughout the month until the last day of each month.