This is a list of mass shootings in the United States that have occurred in 2020. Mass shootings are incidents involving multiple victims of firearm-related violence. The precise inclusion criteria are disputed, and there is no broadly accepted definition.

Gun Violence Archive, a nonprofit research group that tracks shootings and their characteristics in the United States, defines a mass shooting as an incident in which four or more people, excluding the perpetrator(s), are shot in one location at roughly the same time. The Congressional Research Service narrows that definition, limiting it to "public mass shootings", and defined by four or more victims killed. It excludes counting wounded survivors. The Washington Post and Mother Jones use similar definitions, with the latter acknowledging that their definition "is a conservative measure of the problem", as shootings with fewer fatalities occur. The crowdsourced Mass Shooting Tracker project defines a mass shooting as "an incident where four or more people are shot in a single shooting spree. This may include the gunman himself, or police shootings of civilians around the gunman."

, 2 mass shooting have occurred in 2020 that fit the inclusion criteria for this article. In these shootings, 4 were killed and 8 were injured, for a total of 12 victims.
 Definitions 
There are many definitions of a mass shooting. Listed roughly from broad to specific:
 Stanford University MSA Data Project: three or more persons shot in one incident, excluding the perpetrator(s), at one location, at roughly the same time. Excluded are shootings associated with organized crime, gangs or drug wars.
 Mass Shooting Tracker: four or more persons shot in one incident, at one location, at roughly the same time.
 Gun Violence Archive/Vox: four or more shot in one incident, excluding the perpetrators, at one location, at roughly the same time.
 Mother Jones: three or more shot and killed in one incident at a public place, excluding the perpetrators.
 The Washington Post: four or more shot and killed in one incident at a public place, excluding the perpetrators.
 ABC News/FBI: four or more shot and killed in one incident, excluding the perpetrators, at one location, at roughly the same time.
 Congressional Research Service: four or more shot and killed in one incident, excluding the perpetrators, at a public place, excluding gang-related killings and those done with a profit-motive.

Only incidents considered mass shootings by at least two of the above sources are listed below.

 List 

 Date Location Dead Injured Total Description

|-Huntington, West Virginia077Seven people were wounded inside and out a hookah bar early in the morning, potentially after an argument escalated.Trujillo Alto, Puerto Rico415A family of four, including 9-year-old twin boys, were shot and killed at their home after celebrating New Year's Eve. A 16-year-old boy was seriously injured.Family of 4, including twin boys, killed in Puerto Rico

 Statistics 
+2020 US Mass Shooting Statistics By MonthMonthMass ShootingsTotal number killedTotal number woundedOccurred at a school or universityOccurred at a place of worshipJanuaryTotal
The statistics columns for each month are updated after the month ends, in an effort to make sure the correct number of events, individuals affected, and descriptions are accurate. Thus, the number may be incomplete throughout the month until the last day of each month.