Ehd-e-Wafa ( ) is a Pakistani television series created by Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) and Momina Duraid under MD Productions for  Hum Pashto 1 ,Hum TV and PTV Home. It revolves around four school friends with different hopes, goals and aspirations and how their lives change over time as they witness hardships, challenges and betrayal in their friendship and career. It stars Ahad Raza Mir, Alizeh Shah, Osman Khalid Butt, Ahmed Ali Akbar, Zara Noor Abbas and Wahaj Ali in lead roles.

The show was the third most searched item among the category of 'Movies & TV' on Google in Pakistan as confirmed by the Google Trends end-of-years report.
 
It is currently airing in Pashto language on Hum Pashto 1 by the same title.

Plot
The story revolves around a group of high-spirited friends who help, support, and enjoy one another's company as they overcome hardships in their lives. 

Four friends, Saad, Shahzain, Shariq and Shehryar call themselves the SSG (Special 'S' Gang because all their names start with the letter 'S'). They all study in Lawrence College in Murree. Saad's family comprises his father, Brigadier (later Major General) Faraz Inam, who serves in the army, his mother and sister, Rahmeen, an aspiring artist. Shahzain belongs to a rich village family and is the closest to his grandfather, Malik Allahyar. Shariq's family consists of his sister, Ghazala and his widowed mother. Shehryar's father is a bandmaster. They often bunk college together at night and once caught by their hostel warden, Firdous Baig.

On the other hand, there is Dua and Rani. Rani is a vivacious girl, who comes from a rich village family. After three years, she is yet to pass her Intermediate exams, which she ultimately doesn't. Dua comes from Rawalpindi and is seen visiting her cousins, Aisha and Raheel in Murree. Raheel is obnoxious and is over-protective of Dua, which she immensely dislikes and tries to avoid him.

Despite receiving warnings from the headmaster of the college, the SSG still bunk college and this time, they accidentally run into Dua and her cousins. Saad immediately recognizes Dua, while Shariq and Shehryar run away from the scene. Saad tells Shahzain that he had seen Dua twice before and has a crush on her but he didn't have the courage to tell her about his feelings. Shahzain encourages Saad to go after her and get to know her name since he didn't.

The next day, they met Dua again after Shariq spots her with her cousins and tells the other three, who immediately rushes to her. As Shahzain and Shehryar begin to introduce themselves to Dua and tell her about Saad, Raheel pushes Saad, thinking he was harassing Dua and a physical fight follows. The police arrive and take Saad and Raheel into custody, while Shahzain and Shehryar flee, later joined by Shariq.

Dua's parents file a complaint against Saad, in the name of harassment. This causes a rift between the SSG. Shariq refuses to be involved in their tactics anymore. Saad slaps Shahzain, because he made a fuss in front of Dua. In the end, Saad, Shahzain and Shehryar were rusticated from the hostel. Since Sharq wasn't directly involved in the incident, no action was taken against him.

The four friends now go on to lead their separate lives. Shahzain doesn't show up for his exams and slowly transforms into an angry young man. Saad is confused between choosing Army or Medical as his profession but ultimately joins army after finding Dua submitting her application at the same medical college where he went. Later they meet at a park by accident. Dua softens up when she overhears him scolding his pet Zoro for running after her.

Shahzain and Shehryar then visit Saad, wanting to reconcile but Saad humiliates the two and ask them to leave. Saad later departs for PMA (Pakistan Military Academy). Upon arriving at PMA, Saad meets Gulzar Hussain and develops a good friendship with him.

On the other hand, Shahzain decides to marry Dua as a revenge from Saad. 
However dua's parents rejects the proposal. After knowing all these Shehryar stops Shahzain from marrying Dua, and make him realize his mistakes. Then Shahzain Saad, Shariq, Shehryar met to fix every misunderstanding. But learning that shahzain went to Dua's house Saad confronts Shahzain. Then Shahzain marries Rani. Shahzain only invites Shariq and Shehryar for his wedding. When he hears the two talking about Saad, it angers him. Shariq and Shrehyar leave realizing that Shahzain only viewed them as commodities and not friends.

In their next meeting Saad and Dua were confronted by Raheel (Dua's cousin). Dua walks off angrily and goes home. Raheel proposes to Dua for marriage but Dua refuses and tells her father to trust her that Saad is just a friend. She then tells Saad she won't contact him until they both establish their careers. Raheel's parents then invite Dua's parents and insist on their marriage but Dua's father refuses. On the way home, Dua's parents have a road accident. Dua's father passes away and her mother becomes disabled. Her cousin blackmails her into marrying him as he finds out she is adopted. Dua agrees but then expose him in front of his parents. Dua and her mother shift to Abbottabad to live near her medical college. Saad is shown to pass out of PMA with a sword of honour. Later he finds about Dua's father.

Shahzain is shown to be contesting in the by elections. Shariq's YouTube channel has been so well established that he is offered a job as a news anchor at a well-established channel. He accepts the job after declining at first and selects Ramsha (a former news reporter who became friends with Shariq) as producer of his show.

Shahzain wins his elections and becomes an MNA. Shariq achieves success as a news anchor. After passing out from PMA, Saad starts his army duties and visits Dua. He helps Dua in setting up her new home. They grow closer to each other and eventually meet each other's parents. Saad starts planning his wedding and bumps into Shahzain while completing a wedding-related task. They hug each other and reconcile.

Meanwhile, Shehryar is appointed as an Assistant Commissioner and works with Shariq to help free one of their college friends who has been wrongly imprisoned due to a mafia gang. Shariq and Shehryar manage to successfully free him. All the four friends get together for Saad's wedding and are seen teasing Saad. On the night of the wedding, it is revealed that Dua has been appointed as an army doctor and walks down the aisle in her uniform leaving Saad in awe.

After this, all Shazain plans an accident for winning the new elections. Saad, on the other hand, went to LOC Kashmir to fight with India. Shazain wins the elections and Shehryar begins finding out that how that accident happened. Shehryar scolds Shazain that please come back we want our Shazain who was the leader of SSG. Sharik and Ramsha are going to marry each other. Sharik says Shehryar to go to Masooma and apologize to her for his behavior. Shazain apologizes to Rani, his grandfather and Shehryar. Saad then was told by Dua that he is going to be a father.

Due to high alert on LOC all four boys stand up for their country. Shazain went on a live show of India and insults them. Sharik covers media and tells all Pakistan about the problems at LOC. Shehryar tells people to go away from LOC. Meanwhile Rani tells Shazain that he too is going to be a father. Then a fight came and Saad got badly injured. Dua operates him and Saad becomes alright. At the end all friends visit Lawrence College from where they started their journey.

Series Overview & Viewership
 Season No. of episodes Originally broadcast (Pakistan) First episode Last episode 1 26  

Cast
100px|right|Osman Khalid Butt
100px|right|Ahmed Ali Akbar
 Name Role NotesMain characters Osman Khalid Butt  Malik Shahzain Khan  MNA Ahmed Ali Akbar  Shehryar Afzal AC (assistant commissioner) Ahad Raza Mir  Saad Faraz  Pakistan army officer (captain) Alizeh Shah Captain Dr. DuaSaad's love interestZara Noor Abbas Rani  Shahzain's love interest Wahaj Ali  Shariq Habib  JournalistSupporting characters Hajra Yamin  Ramsha  Shariq's colleague and love interest  Momina Iqbal  Masooma  Shehryar's cousin and love interest Vaneeza Ahmed  Faryal  Saad's mother Adnan Samad Khan Captain Gulzar  Saad's army friend Komal Meer  Rameen  Saad's sister Faraz Inam Siddiqui  Faraz Inam  Saad's father and Brigadier General/Major General of Pakistan Army Syed Muhammad Ahmed Malik Allahyar  Shahzain's grandfather Khalifa Sajeer Uddin  Firdous  Warden of Lawrence College Hostel Mian Wassam Waheed  Shahid Ahmed  Duaa's father Ejaz Ahmed Niazi  Master Dean Lawrence College Azeem Sajjad  Malik Yar Mohammad  Shahzain's father Naeema Naeem Butt  Ghazala  Shariq's sister Anjum Habibi  Laal Khan  Shehryar's father Munazzah Arif  Shahzain's mother  Humayun Saeed  Humayun  Saad's Senior Major/Lieutenant Colonel (Special Appearance) Afraz Rasool  Ameesh Goswami  Indian TV anchor (Special Appearance)

 Soundtrack 

Broadcast
National broadcast Region Network PremierePakistan Hum TV22 September 2019-15 March 2020 PTV Home Hum Pashto 1 17 October 2020-presentInternational broadcast Country  Network  Premiere UK Hum Europe22 September 2019-15 March 2020 UAE Hum TV Mena CanadaUSA Hum World Arab World MBC BollywoodMBC 4Coming Soon

Awards and nominations
 YearAward Show CategoryNameResult Ref 20201st Pakistan International Screen AwardsBest Television PlayEhd-e-WafaBest Television Writer Mustafa Afridi''Best Television Actor in Comedy Role Adnan Samad Khan2020 Hum Social Media AwardsMost Popular On Screen CoupleOsman Khalid Butt and Zara Noor Abbas