 Milton Highlands (2021 population: 320) is a designated place located  from the town of Yarmouth within the Municipality of the District of Yarmouth in Nova Scotia, Canada.

Climate
Climate is from Yarmouth Airport located  to the southeast.

The area has a humid continental climate (Köppen: Dfb), closely bordering on an oceanic climate (Köppen: Cfb), typical of climates surrounded by the sea but close to large continents such as southern Norway and coastal Hokkaido but with latitude variations. Being near the -3 °C isotherm in the average of the coldest month (east of the city), causing that in peninsular areas like Yarmouth Bar and Cape Forchu are between a transition band for the oceanic climates (Cfb). Winters are cool and rainy with a January average of  though owing to strong maritime influences, temperatures below  are very rare, and the average high never drops to below freezing at any point in the year. During this period of time, the weather can be unsettled and cloudy due to the Nor'easters coming up the coast from the southwest. As a result, the area averages only 68–100 hours of sunshine from December to February or 25%–34% of possible sunshine. The average annual snowfall is , which can come from Nor'easters from the southwest with a maximum snow depth of  in January, owing to its mild winters, among the mildest in Canada east of the Rockies.

The area's summers are cool due to the strong coastal influence from the sea which keeps summer temperatures cool, meaning temperatures above  are very rare. The average temperature in the warmest month, August is . Spring and fall are transitional seasons in which falls are warmer than spring since the waters are at the warmest temperatures in fall and the coldest during early spring. Precipitation is significant, averaging  a year, with July and August the driest months on average and November the wettest month on average. An outstanding feature is the late-fall to early-winter precipitation maximum, owing to the combination of intense storm activity from November to January and relatively more-stable summers, with thunderstorm activity here much less frequent than in the U.S. Northeast, Mid-Atlantic and points southward. Yarmouth averages 1,898.3 hours of sunshine or 41.2% of possible sunshine with summer being the sunniest and winter being the cloudiest. Yarmouth averages 191 days of fog each year.

The highest temperature ever recorded was  on July 16, 2013. The coldest temperature ever recorded was  on February 14, 1894.

 Demographics 
In the 2021 Canadian census conducted by Statistics Canada, Milton Highlands had a population of 320 living in 142 of its 149 total private dwellings, a change of  from its 2016 population of 343. With a land area of , it had a population density of  in 2021.