Vehicle and parts recording with RFID gate

The Transparent Prototype is a project in the automotive industry to track & trace test vehicles and prototype parts using Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technology.

 Objectives of the project 

The objective of the project "Transparent Prototype" is the tracking & tracing of test vehicles and prototype parts via Radio Frequency Identification (RFID).Peppel, Florian; Müller, Martin; Wolff, Hanno (2013). Gläserner Prototyp - RFID-gestützte Bauzustandsdokumentation im automobilen Prototypenbau. Tagungsband der 16. IFF Wissenschaftstage, Magdeburg. During the development phase, prototype vehicles are subject to continuous change and reassembly. Currently, these changes are still documented by using barcodes or data matrix codes. The "Transparent Prototype" aims to substitute these manual procedures with RFID. This is done with so called RFID gates (see figure). Apart from RFID the project "Transparent Prototype" also addresses enhanced electronical data interchange (EDI) among automotive manufacturers.Spinnarke, Sabine (2015). Bei Volkswagen hat es gefunkt - Mit dem ,gläsernen Prototyp' gibt Volkswagen den Startschuss für Industrie 4.0. Produktion, September.Denkers, Jan Phillip (2015). RFID und eLisa schaffen Transparenz im Prototypenbau. RFID im Blick, November.  Due to the use of new technologies and the digitalization of the
supply chain, the "Transparent Prototype" project is one of the showcases of the Industry 4.0 initiative.

 Methodological approach 

In 2012 the German Association of the Automotive Industry (VDA) established the cross-company working group "Transparent Prototype". The working group developed the industry recommendation VDA 5509,VDA (2015). AutoID/RFID-Einsatz und Datentransfer zur Verfolgung von Bauteilen und
Komponenten in der Fahrzeugentwicklung, December. which describes the process and technical solutions for tracking & tracing test vehicles and prototype parts with RFID. Both have also been described in many practice-orientated and scientific publications.Peppel, Florian; Müller, Martin; Silveira, Miguel; Schmidt, Malte (2014). From Theory into Practice - Implementing RFID-Driven Track&Trace Concepts in the Vehicle Development Process. 16. Forschungskolloquium am Fraunhofer IFF, Magdeburg.Schmidt, Malte (2013). Migration vom Barcode zur passiven RFID-Technologie in der automobilen Logistik - Exemplarische Untersuchung am Beispiel eines Automobilherstellers. Dissertation, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen.Autogramm (2013). Vom Lebenslauf der Teile - Projekt Gläserner Prototyp: RFID-Transponder schaffen Transparenz. Autogramm, April.Van Bocxlaer, Anja (2014). Gläserner Prototyp - Prototypenbau als Innovationstreiber für RFID-Einsatz. RFID im Blick, April.Autogramm (2015). Die Infrastruktur steht - Das Projekt Gläserner Prototyp sorgt für Transparenz und Effizienz. Autogramm, January.Swedberg, Claire (2015). Porsche Uses RFID to Track Prototype Testing, Improve Security. RFID-Journal, February.

 Prevalence in the automotive industry 

The RFID-based tracking & tracing of test vehicles and prototype parts with RFID has been implemented in practice extensively since 2013/2014. Known users are the Volkswagen, Porsche, and Audi brands of Volkswagen Group. In 2018 the technical development of the Volkswagen brand is supplied by approximately 400 suppliers with RFID labeled components, the whole VW group receives RFID components from more than 500 suppliersVan Bocxlaer, Anja (2018). Ohne RFID keine Prototypen Entwicklung bei Volkswagen RFID im Blick, June.. For this reason, the project currently ranks among the most significant RFID initiatives within the automotive industrySchmidt, Malte (2015). Volkswagen AG forges ahead with Transparent Prototype. RFID Journal, October.  and is therefore a driver for cross-company RFID standardization in the context of Industry 4.0.Automotive IT (2015). Autoindustrie einigt sich auf RFID-Standards. Automotive IT, April.Van Bocxlaer, Anja (2015). Standards sind eine tragende Säule von Industrie 4.0. RFID im Blick, July.