Sheikh Abdullah Awad Al Juhany (), is one of the Imams of the Grand Mosque Masjid al-Haram in Mecca. He holds a B.A. from the faculty of Qur'an at The Islamic University of Madinah, and a doctorate (Ph.D.) from Umm al-Qura University in Mecca.

Juhany has led the Taraweeh prayers during Ramadan in Mecca since 2005, and is known for his emotional Quranic recitation style. His voice has been widely recorded and is internationally distributed by various communities.

 Biography 
 Early life 
Sheikh Al-Juhany was born in Medina holy City of Saudi Arabia on 13 January 1976. He completed the memorization of the Quran at a very young age. At a very young age he entered in the Quran Recitation Competition which was held in Masjid Al Haram every year (and still is) and won the first prize.

 Personal life 
He is married, has two sons (Muhammad and Abdul Aziz) and two daughters as well. Both of his sons are young and are memorizing the Holy Quran. He has three brothers and two sisters. He is the youngest son and was born in Medina, Saudi Arabia in 1976.

 Academic background 
As he came from a very Religious background, his parents wanted to him to progress in the field and hence he gained education from Umm Al Qurra University, and gained a Ph.D. Degree in Islamic Sharia and Quranic Recitation. Thus making him one of the youngest ones to gain a Ph.D. Degree from Umm Al Qura University.Abdullah Awad al Juhani was born into a very religious family. His family encouraged him to pursue his studies in the field of Islamic Studies due to which he gained a doctorate in Islamic Shari’ah and Qur’anic Recitation from Umm al Qura University, at a very young age.

In 2007, the Sheikh was appointed as the permanent Imam of Masjid al Haram. And since 2008, he has been leading the Taraweeh prayers in Makkah during Ramadan.

Abdullah Awad al Juhani has been the Imam at Masjid Al Quba, Masjid Al Jinn, Masjid Al Nabawi, and Masjid Al Qiblatain.

 Career 
He became a TA from the Preparation of Teachers (Teaching School) whilst still in Medina. He used to supervise the teaching and memorization of the Qur'an in a Masjid in the Western part of Medina. He led his first Salah in Al-Masjid an-Nabawi in the year 1998. He had been appointed to lead salah in one of the biggest Masjids in  Medina, but King Abdullah (whilst he was still Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia) appointed him to lead Salah in Al-Masjid an-Nabawi.Shaikh Al-Juhany Ph.D is one of the Imams of the Grand Mosque (Masjid al-Haram) in Mecca. He holds a bachelors degree from the faculty of Qur'an at The Islamic University of Madinah, and a doctorate (Ph.D) from Umm al-Qura University in Mecca. Juhany has led the Taraweeh prayers during Ramadan in Mecca since 2008, and is known for his emotional Quranic recitation style. His voice has been widely recorded and is internationally distributed by various communities. He graduated from Faculty of Qur'an at The Islamic University of Madinah with a degree in Qur'anic Studies. He was taught by Sheikh Muhammad Ayyub one of the imams of Masjid an-Nabawi. He then went on to obtain his Masters and Doctorate (PhD) in Shariah and Quranic recitations from Umm al-Qura University in Mecca. He led his first Salah in Al-Masjid an-Nabawi in the year 1998. He was appointed as an imam of Masjid Al Haram, Mecca in July 2007.

He was appointed as an imam of Masjid Al Haram, Mecca in July 2007. He is considered as the only Imam who has been an Imam in [some] of the biggest masjids of the Muslim world. He is or has been an imam of Masjid Al Haram in Mecca, Masjid Al Nabawi in Medina, Masjid Quba and Masjid Qiblatain.