Notion is a note-taking software platform designed to help members of companies or organizations manage their knowledge for greater efficiency and productivity.

History
Notion Labs Inc is a startup based in San Francisco, founded in 2013 by Ivan Zhao, Chris Prucha, Jessica Lam, Simon Last and Toby Schachman. At that time, they declined to meet any venture capitalists or discuss acquiring a higher valuation.

In March of 2018, Notion 2.0 was released. It was positively received by Product Hunt and rated #1 Product of the Month. At that point, the company had fewer than 10 employees.

In June of 2018, an official Android app was released.

In September of 2019, the company announced it had reached 1 million users. In April 2020, it became valued at two billion dollars.

In January 2020, Notion received $50 million in investments from Index Ventures and other investors.

On September 7, 2021, Notion acquired Automate.io, a Hyderabad-based startup. In October of that year, a new round of funding led by Coatue Management and Sequoia Capital helped Notion raise $275 million. The investment valued Notion at $10 billion, and the company had 20 million users.

In 2022, Notion launched the Notion Certified Program, an official accreditation allowing users to expand their expertise. It also joined the Security First Initiative, a coalition of tech companies pledging to proactively share security information with their customers.

In June 2022, Notion acquired calendar software Cron to add it to its suite of productivity apps.

In November 2022, Notion announced its official Japanese release.

 Software 
Notion is a collaboration platform with modified Markdown support that integrates kanban boards, tasks, wikis and databases. It is an all-in-one workspace for notetaking, knowledge and data management, and project and task management. It is a file management tool offering a unified workspace, allowing users to comment on ongoing projects, participate in discussions, and receive feedback. It can be accessed by cross-platform apps and by most web browsers.

It includes a tool for "clipping" content from webpages. It helps users schedule tasks, manage files, save documents, set reminders, keep agendas, and organize their work. LaTeX support allows writing and pasting equations in block or inline form.  Users can also embed online content in their Notion pages using Embed.ly, with real-time notes added to embedded video playing in PiP mode.

 Pricing 
Notion has a four-tiered subscription model: Free, Personal, Team and Enterprise. Users can also earn credit via referrals. Users are not charged if they have a remaining balance in their accounts. An academic email address allows a free Personal plan. As of May 2020, the company upgraded the Personal plan to allow unlimited blocks, a change from the previous cap in the plan.