Trevor Paglen (born 1974) is an American artist, geographer, and author whose work tackles mass surveillance and data collection.

Sean O'Hagan, writing in The Guardian, said that Paglen, whose "ongoing grand project [is] the murky world of global state surveillance and the ethics of drone warfare", "is one of the most conceptually adventurous political artists working today, and has collaborated with scientists and human rights activists on his always ambitious multimedia projects."

In 2016, he won the Deutsche Börse Photography Foundation Prize and he has also won The Cultural Award from the German Society for Photography."The Cultural Award of the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Photographie (DGPh)". Deutsche Gesellschaft für Photographie e.V.. Accessed 7 March 2017. In 2017, he was a recipient of the MacArthur Genius Grant.

Life and work
Paglen earned a B.A. in 1998 from the University of California at Berkeley, a Master of Fine Arts degree in 2002 from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, and a Ph.D. in geography in 2008 from the University of California at Berkeley, where he currently works as a researcher. While at UC Berkeley, Paglen lived in the Berkeley Student Cooperative, residing in Chateau, Rochdale, Fenwick, and Convent co-ops.

Paglen has published a number of books. Torture Taxi (2006), (co-authored with investigative journalist Adam Clay Thompson) was the first book to comprehensively describe the CIA's extraordinary rendition program. I Could Tell You But Then You Would Have to be Destroyed by Me (2007), is a look at the world of black projects through unit patches and memorabilia created for top-secret programs.Logos offer a guide to secret military programs, International Herald Tribune, April 2, 2008. Blank Spots on the Map: The Dark Geography of the Pentagon's Secret World (2009) is a broader look at secrecy in the United States.Paglen, Trevor "Blank Spots on the Map: The Dark Geography of the Pentagon's Secret World" New York: Dutton, 2009 The Last Pictures (2012) is a collection of 100 images to be placed on permanent media and launched into space on EchoStar XVI, as a repository available for future civilizations (alien or human) to find.

Sean O'Hagan, writing in The Guardian, said that Paglen, whose "ongoing grand project [is] the murky world of global state surveillance and the ethics of drone warfare", "is one of the most conceptually adventurous political artists working today, and has collaborated with scientists and human rights activists on his always ambitious multimedia projects." His visual work such as his "Limit Telephotography" and "The Other Night Sky" series have received widespread attention for both his technical innovations and for his conceptual project that involves simultaneously making and negating documentary-style truth-claims.Keenan, Tom. "Disappearances: The Photographs of Trevor Paglen" Aperture, No. 191. Summer 2008

He was an Eyebeam Commissioned Artist in 2007.

Paglen is featured in the nerd culture documentary Traceroute.

Publications
Publications by Paglen
I Could Tell You But Then You Would Have to be Destroyed by Me. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House, 2007. .
Blank Spots on the Map: The Dark Geography of the Pentagon's Secret World. New York: Dutton, 2009. .
Invisible: Covert Operations and Classified Landscapes, Photographs by Trevor Paglen. New York: Aperture, 2010. . With an essay by Rebecca Solnit.
The Last Pictures. Oakland, CA: University of California, 2012. .
 Trevor Paglen. London: Phaidon, 2018. . With essays by Laren Cornell, Julia Bryan-Wilson, Omar Kholeif.

Publications paired with others
Torture Taxi. Co-authored with Adam Clay Thompson. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House Publishing, 2006. .
Icon, 2007. .

Publications with contributions by Paglen
Experimental Geography - Radical Approaches to Landscape, Cartography, and Urbanism. Brooklyn, NY: Melville House, 2009. . Edited by Nato Thompson. With essays by Paglen, Thompson, and Jeffrey Kastner.
Trevor Paglen and Jacob Appelbaum - Autonomy Cube. Revolver, 2016. . Essays by Luke Skrebowski and Keller Easterling on Autonomy Cube, a piece of sculpture by Paglen and Jacob Appelbaum. In English and German.

Exhibitions
Paglen has shown photography and other visual works.
Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art, North Adams, Massachusetts
Andy Warhol Museum of Modern Art, Medzilaborce, Slovakia
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco, CA
Bellwether Gallery, New York, November–December 2006.Trevor Paglen show at Bellwether Gallery in 2006
Still Revolution: Suspended in Time, Museum of Contemporary Canadian Art, Toronto, May–June 2009. Group exhibition with Paglen, Barbara Astman, Walead Beshty, Mat Collishaw, Stan Douglas, Idris Khan, Martha Rosler, and Mikhael Subotzky.
Geographies of Seeing, Lighthouse, Brighton, England, October–November 2012Trevor Paglen show at Lighthouse in 2012
Trevor Paglen, Altman Siegel gallery, San Francisco, CA, March–May 2015
Autonomy Cube, Edith-Russ-Haus, Oldenburg, Germany, October 2015 – January 2016. Sculpture by Paglen and Jacob Appelbaum.http://www.edith-russ-haus.de/no_cache/en/exhibitions/exhibitions/archive.html?tx_kdvzerhapplications_pi4[exhibition]=198&tx_kdvzerhapplications_pi4[action]=show&tx_kdvzerhapplications_pi4[controller]=Exhibition
Deutsche Börse Photography Foundation Prize 2016, The Photographers' Gallery, London, April–July 2016. Deutsche Börse Photography Prize shortlist with Paglen, Erik Kessels, Laura El-Tantawy, and Tobias Zielony.
 Radical Landscapes, di Rosa, Napa, February–April 2016
 A Study of Invisible Images, Metro Pictures, New York, September–October 2017

 Experimental Geography 
Paglen is credited with coining the term "Experimental Geography" to describe practices coupling experimental cultural production and art-making with ideas from critical human geography about the production of space, materialism, and praxis. The 2009 book Experimental Geography: Radical Approaches to Landscape, Cartography, and Urbanism is largely inspired by Paglen's work.Nato Thompson interview in The Nation

Awards
2014: Pioneer Award from the Electronic Frontier Foundation.
2015: The Cultural Award from the German Society for Photography (DGPh)
2016: Deutsche Börse Photography Foundation Prize
2017: MacArthur Fellow, John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, IL
2018: Nam June Paik Art Center Prize

Collections
Paglen's work is held in the following public collections:
Columbus Museum of Art, Columbus, OH
San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco, CA

Works