Monica Berg is a Norwegian bartender. Based in London, in 2019, she received the Altos Bartenders' Bartender Award at the World's 50 Best Bars, making her the first woman to be given the award. She co-owns the bar Tayr + Elementary, in London, with her partner Alex Kratena. Berg has her own liqueur line, Muyu, is co-founder of the nonprofit P(our), and co-created Back of House, a digital platform used by hospitality workers to anonymous and safely report discrimination, harassment, and other issues. 

Early life and education

Monica Berg is originally from Oslo, Norway. As a child, her family took her hunting, fishing and mushroom hunting, experiences that would influence her bartending style. She started working in hospitality when she was 15. It is in Oslo where she began bartending. She attended H.Butlers Bartending School. 

Career

After completing H.Butlers Bartending School, she bought and operated the school. In 2013, she relocated to London and served as head bartender at Pollen Street Social in London, followed by a bartending at Himkok in Oslo.

Berg was awarded the Linie Honorary Award for her contributions to Norwegian food and drink culture in 2015. In 2016, Berg founded P(our), a nonprofit symposium focused on bartending culture. She was featured in Where Bartenders Drink published by Phaidon in 2017. 

Berg and her partner Alex Kratena opened Tayr + Elementary in London in 2019. That same year, she received the Altos Bartenders' Bartender Award at the World's 50 Best Bars. In 2019, she also co-launched Back of House, a digital platform for hospitality workers to safely and anonymous report workplace harassment, discrimination, and other problems.

Style, cocktails and influences

Berg's cocktails often center around fresh, seasonal ingredients. At Tayr + Elementary, Berg works in what she describes a "collective effort" with other staff members to create cocktails, instead of each bartender creating their own individual drinks. Berg also wants to make accessible cocktails, using a test called "Would you serve this to your mother?" to decide if the beverage should make the Tayr + Elementary menu.