The Elementary Teachers' Federation of Ontario (ETFO; ) is a labour union representing all public elementary school teachers, occasional teachers and some Designated Early Childhood Educators (DECEs) in the Canadian province of Ontario. The union has 76 local chapters in the province, and over 81,000 members. The union was founded on July 1, 1998, by the merger of the Federation of Women Teachers' Associations of Ontario (FWTAO) and the Ontario Public School Teachers' Federation (OPSTF).

ETFO's 81,000 members join l'Association des enseignantes et des enseignants Franco-ontariens (representing approximately 8,000 members), the Ontario English Catholic Teachers' Association (representing approximately 45,000 members) and the Ontario Secondary School Teachers' Federation (representing approximately 60,000 members) to form the Ontario Teachers' Federation.Welcome to ETFO, Published by ETFO, Toronto, ON (2011) ETFO is also a member of the Canadian Teachers' Federation and Education International. 

Governance

The governance framework is outlined in a number of different documents including the Bylaws, Constitution, Human Rights Statement, Policy Statements, Position Statements, and Equity Statement. These documents form the framework for how ETFO is governed and what it sets out to accomplish for its members.

Provincial Presidents

 Term  Name  Local 2009–Present  Sam Hammond  Hamilton-Wentworth Teacher Local 2007 - 2009  David Clegg  York Region Teacher Local 2002 - 2007  Emily Noble  Algoma Teacher Local 1998 - 2002  Phyllis J. Lennox (née Benedict)  Kawartha Pine Ridge Teacher Local2011/12 ETFO Reference BOOK, Member Involvement Section

Sam Hammond

Sam Hammond is serving his fourth term as President of ETFO. He was initially elected in August 2009. Prior to being president, Hammond served two years as First-Vice President and was Vice-President from 2004 to 2007. Hammond was first elected to provincial Executive in August 2003.

Provincial Executive

ETFO's provincial organization includes four fully released officers: President, First Vice-President, Vice-President Female and Vice-President. All four of these officers are ETFO members (teachers, occasional teachers, DECEs or other educational professionals) that have been released from their teaching duties for their term in office.

In addition to the 4 released officers, ETFO's provincial governing body includes one representative to the Ontario Teachers' Federation (OTF Table Officer), and as many additional officers required to make up the 14-member Executive. Of those remaining positions, 4 of them are open to women only.

All Provincial Executive positions are elected by the general membership at ETFO's Annual Meeting held each summer in August. All terms last 2 years.

Executive, 2019–2021
 Name  Position  Local Sam Hammond  President  Hamilton-Wentworth Teacher Local Karen Campbell  First Vice-President  Elementary Teachers of Toronto Local David Mastin  Vice-President  Durham Teacher Local Monica Rusnak  Vice-President  Ontario North East Local Nathan Core  OTF Table Officer  Waterloo Region Occasional Teacher Local Adelina Cecchin  Executive Member  Greater Essex County Teacher Local Amy Chevis  Executive Member  Simcoe County Occasional Teacher Local Mary Fowler  Executive Member  Durham Teacher Local Joy Lachica  Executive Member  Elementary Teachers of Toronto Local Felcia Samuel  Executive Member  Elementary Teachers of Toronto Local Sabrina Sawyer  Executive Member  Grand Erie Teacher Local Mario Spagnuolo  Executive Member  Greater Essex Teacher Local Sylvia Van Campen  Executive Member  Upper Canada Occasional Teacher Local Greg Weiler  Executive Member  Waterloo Region Teacher Local

Non-elected positions

 Name  Position Sharron O'Halloran  General Secretary Jerry DeQuetteville  Deputy General Secretary Bobbi Taillefer  Deputy General Secretary
ETFO Reference Book 2019-2020

ETFO locals

Each school board in Ontario has at least 1 ETFO Local serving members who work within that school board. Teacher Locals are present in all school boards, 1 Local (James Bay) has only a Teacher Local, 10 boards have DECE (Dedicated Early Childhood Educator) Locals, and 2 boards have ESP and one of those 2 (Renfrew County) also has a PSP Local.

The objectives and priorities of ETFO are contained in the constitution:

While all boards now have DECEs as a result of the implementation of Full Day Kindergarten for children aged 4 – 6, not all of those educators are represented by ETFO.

 Region  Teacher Local  OT Local  DECE Local  ESP and PSP Local Algoma  Teacher  OT     Avon Maitland  Teacher  OT    Bluewater  Teacher  OT     Durham  Teacher  OT  DECE and Catholic DECE   Grand Erie  Teacher  OT  DECE    Greater Essex County  Teacher  OT     Halton  Teacher  OT  DECE   Hamilton-Wentworth  Teacher  OT  DECE   Hastings-Prince Edward  Teacher  OT     James Bay  Teacher       Kawartha Pine Ridge  Teacher  OT     Keewatin-Patricia  Teacher  OT     Lakehead  Teacher  OT     Lambton Kent  Teacher  OT     Limestone  Teacher  OT     Near North  Teacher  OT     Niagara  Teacher  OT     Ontario North East  Teacher  OT     Ottawa-Carleton  Teacher  OT     Peel  Teacher  OT     Rainbow  Teacher  OT  DECE    Rainy River District  Teacher  OT    ESP Renfrew County  Teacher OT    ESP and PSP Simcoe County  Teacher  OT  DECE   Superior Greenstone  Teacher  OT     Thames Valley  Teacher  OT    Toronto Teacher  OT  Catholic DECE   Trillium Lakelands  Teacher  OT  DECE    Upper Canada  Teacher  OT     Upper Grand  Teacher  OT     Waterloo Region  Teacher  OT  DECE   York Region  Teacher  OT    

ETFO Reference Book 2015-2016

Advocacy and equity

ETFO has been seen as a leader among teachers' federations on equity issues. With 80%+ female members, ETFO is particularly active in its support for women's participation and leadership.

The ETFO Executive has adopted this definition of equity: