Artificial Intelligence Art refers to any artwork created using Artificial intelligence software,AIArtists.org AIArtists.org: "What is AI Art?" such as Ahmed Elgammal's AICAN, and Sougwen Chung's collaborative paintings  Drawing Operations (Duet)). 

One of the first significant AI artists was  Harold Cohen, who began developing the AARON system beginning in the 1960s. In the 1990s and 2000s, Scott Draves and Karl Sims created artworks based on artificial evolution. AI art has greatly developed since 2018 with the discovery of generative adversarial networks (GANs), and how machine learning algorithms could be used to generate images. A timeline of AI art illustrates how this artistic movement has evolved over time. 

 Sales 
One AI-generated artwork that has been sold was at the Grand Palais at the Salon de Comparaison on February 13, 2018, by AI artist and scientist  "ALAgrApHY" 

An auction sale of artificial intelligence art was at Christie's Auction House in New York, where the AI artwork sold for $432,500, which was almost 45 times higher than its estimate of $7,000-$10,000. The artwork was created by "Obvious", a Paris-based collective consisting of Hugo Caselles-Dupré, Pierre Fautrel and Gauthier Vernier.

 Examples of AI Art  
Popular artists using AI in their creative practice according to aiartists.org include: 

 Pindar Van Arman  - Creativity and AI
 Refik Anadol  - Architecture and AI
 Sougwen Chung  - Painting and AI
 Wayne McGregor  - Choreography and AI
 Lauren McCarthy  - Performance and AI
 Mario Klingemann  - Animation and AI
 Taryn Southern  - Music and AI
 Oxia Palus  - Resurrected lost art using AI
 Jake Elwes  - Visual Art and AI
 Anna Ridler - Visual art and AI

You can see more examples of AI artists here, including a gallery of 20+ artists using AI with mediums ranging from poetry to graphic design. 

AI ART NET and | Cueva Gallery  include several other AI Artists not listed above.   

Art AI is another online gallery featuring thousands of unique AI generated artworks.

Process
"Obvious" uses a two step process to create their art.  The first step is the "Generator", the second is the "Discriminator".  The process is fed with images of existing art works and the "Generator" attempts to create new art works based on that input.  The role of the "Discriminator" is to see if it can spot which works are computer generated.  If it fails to spot a piece, that piece is considered successful.

Tools
Playform is a no-code AI Art generation platform. Playform has efficient implementations of different AI methods which allow artist and creative designers experiment and explore with AI as part of their process.  

DeepDream is one of the more well-known AI art tools, but there are many other tools that help artists create AI art. You can browse a list of tools to generate AI art here. 

Racism Warnings
Artificial intelligence art experts and police have warned against using bad training data to classify people after website ImageNet Roulette let people upload their images. The AI then reproduced the image along with an annotation.