Argentina's charts are provided by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers (CAPIF) and Monitor Latino. While the former one provides monthly charts on physical album and digital singles sales.

Albums
This is a list of the number-one hits of 2018 on the Argentina's Albums Charts chart, ranked by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers (CAPIF).
 Month Album Artist(s)  January Sogno Andrea Bocelli  If necessary, click on "Ventas Físicas Mensual", and select "2018" and "Enero". The chart will load automatically.
Singles
This is a list of the number-one hits of 2018 on the Argentina's Singles Charts chart, ranked by the Argentine Chamber of Phonograms and Videograms Producers (CAPIF).
  Song Artist(s)  January "Corazón" Maluma featuring Nego do Borel  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Enero". The chart will load automatically. February "Dura" Daddy Yankee  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Febrero". The chart will load automatically. March  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Marzo". The chart will load automatically. April "X" Nicky Jam and J Balvin  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Abril". The chart will load automatically. May "Te Boté (Remix)" Nio García, Casper Mágico and Bad Bunny featuring Darell, Nicky Jam and Ozuna  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Mayo". The chart will load automatically. June  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Junio". The chart will load automatically. July "Sin Pijama" Becky G and Natti Natasha  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Julio". The chart will load automatically. August "Cuando Te Besé" Becky G and Paulo Londra  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Agosto". The chart will load automatically. September  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Septiembre". The chart will load automatically. October "Taki Taki" DJ Snake featuring Selena Gomez, Ozuna and Cardi B  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Octubre". The chart will load automatically. November "Adán y Eva" Paulo Londra  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Noviembre". The chart will load automatically. December  If necessary, click on "Digital Mensual", and select "2018" and "Diciembre". The chart will load automatically.