Yeule (stylised as yeule) is the musical project of London-based songwriter and producer Nat Ćmiel. Formed in 2012, it incorporates elements of ambient, glitch and Southeast Asian post-pop. The name Yeule is derived from the Final Fantasy character of the same name (spelled differently).

Early life
Ćmiel was born in Singapore where she attended school. She first started playing music at the age of 6 on her parents Yamaha piano and learned classically although eventually dropped taking lessons, and wanted to explore something more challenging which led her to guitar and drums. She initially started playing waltz pieces however soon moved onto songs from the soundtracks of Final Fantasy X and Kingdom Hearts. She later went onto sing in a jazz band under the name Riot Diet, covering songs from Ella Fitzgerald and the Pixies. After graduating from high school, she applied to Central Saint Martins to study fashion communication and womenswear.

Growing up, feelings of loneliness and depression were present due in part to her nomadic upbringing. She found solace on the internet, which would influence her later works.

History
Her first release under the Yeule title was her self titled EP on March 3, 2014.

On December 11, 2016, she released her second EP entitled "pathos", which was dedicated to David Singh. 

She followed this up with the OST to interactive simulator game "Lost Memories Dot Net" which was released on July 17, 2017.

On September 27, 2017, she released her third EP entitled "Coma" in regards to the writing Ćmiel said that "I wrote this album to commemorate the people I’d lost." The EP received a positive reception with Duncan Cooper of The Fader describing it as "dream-pop perfection". 

She signed to Bayonet Records on July 17, 2019. 

On October 25, 2019, she released her debut studio album "Serotonin II". On the process of creating the album she said that "Writing the record, I was dreadful. I didn’t ask for much, I don’t need to be happy. I just wanted to be content." The album received a positive critical reception with Jude Noel of Tiny Mix Tapes giving the album 4/5 and saying that "Melancholia aside, it’s serotonin ii’s impeccable sound design that has kept me coming back".

Personal life
She is currently studying at Central Saint Martins for a degree in Fine Arts.

Discography

Studio albums
Serotonin II (2019)

Extended play
Yeule (2014)
Pathos (2016)
Coma (2017)

Soundtrack
Lost Memories Dot Net (2017)