Yeule is the musical project by London-based songwriter and producer Nat Ćmiel. Formed in 2012 it incorporates elements of Ambient, Glitch and Southeast Asian post-pop. The name yeule is from the final fantasy character of the same name (spelt differently, however).

Early life
Nat Ćmiel was born in Singapore. She first started playing music at the age of 6 on her parents Yamaha piano and learned classical although eventually dropped taking lessons, finding them to lack challenge which eventually led her to play guitar and drum. She initially started playing waltz pieces however soon moved onto songs from the soundtracks of Final Fantasy X and Kingdom Hearts.  She later went onto sing in a jazz band under the name Riot Diet, covering songs from Ella Fitzgerald and the Pixies. After graduating from high school, she applied to Central Saint Martins to study fashion communication and womenswear.

Growing up feelings of loneliness and depression were present. She found solace on the internet, which would later influence her later works
F
History
Her first release under the yeule title was her self titled EP on March 3, 2014.

On December 11, 2016, she released her second EP entitled "pathos", it was dedicated to David Singh 

She followed this up with the OST to interactive simulator game "Lost Memories Dot Net" it was released on July 17, 2017

On September 27, 2017, she released her third EP entitled "Coma"

On October 25, 2019, she released her debut studio album "Serotonin II". Speaking of the process of creating the album she said that "Writing the record, I was dreadful. I didn’t ask for much, I don’t need to be happy. I just wanted to be content." The album received a positive critical reception with Jude Noel of Tiny Mix Tapes giving the album 4/5 and saying that "Melancholia aside, it’s serotonin ii’s impeccable sound design that has kept me coming back"

Discography

Studio Albums
Serotoin II (2019)

Extended play
Yeule (2014)
Pathos (2016)
Coma (2017)

Soundtrack
Lost Memories Dot Not (2017)