Personality computing is a research field related to artificial intelligence and personality psychology that studies personality by means of computational techniques from different sources, including text, multimedia, and social networks.

 Overview 
Personality computing addresses three main problems involving personality: automatic personality recognition, perception, and synthesis. Vinciarelli, Alessandro, and Gelareh Mohammadi. "A survey of personality computing." IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 5.3 (2014): 273–291. Automatic personality recognition is the inference of the personality type of target individuals from their digital footprint. Automatic personality perception is the inference of the personality attributed by an observer to a target individual based on some observable behavior. Automatic personality synthesis is the generation of the style or behaviour of artificial personalities in Avatars and virtual agents.

Self-assessed personality tests or observer ratings are always exploited as the ground truth for testing and validating the performance of artificial intelligence algorithms for the automatic prediction of personality types. There is a wide variety of personality tests, such as the Myers Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI)Isabel Briggs Myers and Peter B Myers. 2010. Giftsdiffering:  Understanding personality type.  Davies-Black Publishing. or the MMPI, but the most used are tests based on the Five Factor Model such as the Revised NEO Personality Inventory.Paul  T  Costa  and  Robert  R  McCrae.  2008.   The  re-vised neo personality inventory (neo-pi-r).In G.J.Boyle,  G  Matthews  and  D.  Saklofske  (Eds.).  TheSAGE  handbook  of  personality  theory  and  assessment2:179–198

Personality computing can be considered as an extension or complement of Affective computing, where the former focuses on personality traits and the latter on affective states. A further extension of the two fields is Character Computing which combines various character states and traits including but not limited to personality and affect.

History
Personality computing began around 2005 with the pioneering research in personality recognition by Shlomo Argamon and later by François Mairesse. These works showed that personality traits could be inferred with reasonable accuracy from text, such as blogs, self-presentations,Argamon, Shlomo, et al. "Lexical predictors of personality type." (2005).Oberlander, Jon, and Scott Nowson. "Whose thumb is it anyway?: classifying author personality from weblog text." Proceedings of the COLING/ACL on Main conference poster sessions. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2006.Mairesse, François, et al. "Using linguistic cues for the automatic recognition of personality in conversation and text." Journal of artificial intelligence research 30 (2007): 457–500. and email addresses.Back, Mitja D., Stefan C. Schmukle, and Boris Egloff. "How extraverted is honey. bunny77@ hotmail. de? Inferring personality from e-mail addresses." Journal of Research in Personality 42.4 (2008): 1116–1122. In 2008, the concept of "portable personality" for the distributed management of personality profiles has been developed.

A few years later, research began in personality recognition and perception from multimodal and social signals, such as recorded meetingsPianesi, Fabio, et al. "Multimodal recognition of personality traits in social interactions." Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Multimodal interfaces. ACM, 2008. and voice calls.Mohammadi, Gelareh, and Alessandro Vinciarelli. "Automatic personality perception: Prediction of trait attribution based on prosodic features." IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing 3.3 (2012): 273–284.

In the 2010s, the research focused mainly on personality recognition and perception from social media, helped by the first workshops organized by Fabio Celli.Celli, Fabio, et al. "Workshop on computational personality recognition (shared task)." Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational Personality Recognition. 2013. In particular personality was extracted from Facebook,Quercia, Daniele, et al. "The personality of popular Facebook users." Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on computer supported cooperative work. ACM, 2012.Schwartz, H. Andrew, et al. "Personality, gender, and age in the language of social media: The open-vocabulary approach." PLOS ONE 8.9 (2013): e73791. Celli, Fabio, Elia Bruni, and Bruno Lepri. "Automatic personality and interaction style recognition from Facebook profile pictures." Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Multimedia. ACM, 2014. TwitterGolbeck, Jennifer, et al. "Predicting personality from twitter." Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011 IEEE Third International Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom), 2011 IEEE Third International Conference on. IEEE, 2011. and Instagram.Ferwerda, Bruce, Markus Schedl, and Marko Tkalcic. "Predicting personality traits with instagram pictures." Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Emotions and Personality in Personalized Systems 2015. ACM, 2015. In the same years, automatic personality synthesis helped improve the coherence of simulated behavior in virtual agents.Faur, Caroline, et al. "PERSEED: a self-based model of personality for virtual agents inspired by socio-cognitive theories." Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (ACII), 2013 Humaine Association Conference on. IEEE, 2013.

Scientific works by Michal Kosinski demonstrated the validity of Personality Computing from different digital footprints, in particular from user preferences such as Facebook page likes,Kosinski, Michal, David Stillwell, and Thore Graepel. "Private traits and attributes are predictable from digital records of human behavior." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2013): 201218772. showed that machines can recognize personality better than humans Youyou, Wu, Michal Kosinski, and David Stillwell. "Computer-based personality judgments are more accurate than those made by humans." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112.4 (2015): 1036–1040. and raised a warning against Cambridge Analytica and misuse of this kind of technology.

 Applications 
Personality computing techniques, in particular personality recognition and perception, have applications in Social media marketing, where they can help reducing the cost of advertising campaigns through psychological targeting.Matz, S. C., et al. "Psychological targeting as an effective approach to digital mass persuasion." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2017): 201710966.Celli, Fabio, Pietro Zani Massani, and Bruno Lepri. "Profilio: Psychometric Profiling to Boost Social Media Advertising." Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Multimedia Conference. ACM, 2017. 