The Fontevraud Gradual (often known as the Gradual of Eleanor of Brittany) is an illuminated manuscript containing the songs of the liturgical year, for the use of monks of the order of Fontevraud Abbey, mother house of the Order of Fontevraud. The coat of arms of Eleanor of Brittany appears on the edges, but is later than the manuscript.

 History 
The gradual was made in Paris in the 1250s (well before Eleanor's birth), perhaps in the studio of Nicolas Lombard. Its patrons may have been John II, Duke of Brittany and Beatrice of England, Eleanor's parents. It would have been entrusted to their daughter in 1290 when she arrived at the abbey. Eleanor became an abbess in 1304. When she died in 1342, she left the gradual to the abbey. Richard and Mary Rouse attribute the manuscript to one of the four artists who produced a glossy bible commissioned by Guy de La Tour du Pin, bishop of Clermont from 1250 to 1285.Pierre Campagne, Monique Boulestin, Le Graduel de Fontevrault, XIIIe siècle, Exposition du 2 mai au 2 juin 2001, Bfm de Limoges, Limoges, Bibliothèque francophone multimédia de Limoges, 2001 (Filigranes, 2)

In 1387, Pascal Hugonot, abbot of Saint-Pierre de la Couture in Le Mans donated the gradual to the collegiate church of Saint-Junien in Haute-Vienne. Father Joseph Nadaud studied it there in the middle of the 18th century. During the French Revolution and its seizure of religious property, the gradual was deposited in Limoges.

 Contents 
The gradual is strange and unconventional, remarkable by a rich and original iconography. It is made up of 301 leaves. Each page contains ten or eleven lines of music and text. The music is noted in black square notes on a staff of four red lines. The text is adorned with golden and coloured decorated initials. Many miniatures, in the form of large historiated initials relate events of the life of Christ such as the Nativity, the Adoration of the Magi, and the Resurrection. The also include images of saints such as Saint Lawrence or Radegund. These are large initials that sometimes occupy almost half the page. The words they begin are written in golden capitals and which span the width of the page. The gradual is also remarkable for the music. It contains pieces of Gregorian chant, as well as its own repertoire: sequences, proses, readings and three polyphonic pieces with two voices: Res est admirabilis (sequence), Verbum bonum (sequence) and a Credo.

The document also contains several farced epistles. These are readings from the Mass in which the text of Scripture is provided, verse after verse, either with a Latin paraphrase or with a translation in the vernacular. The paraphrase or translation constitutes the 'farce' of the scriptural text. The farce usually takes a versified and musical form. The gradual contains five stuffed epistles, starting at folios 29, 46v, 272, 274 and 278. The epistle starting at fol. 29 is a farced epistle of Saint Stephen (from December 26).

 Conservation 
The gradual is currently at the Limoges municipal library. The public cannot consult it, but it is possible to browse it online.

 Recordings 
Ensemble Organum recorded songs from the book in 1993 in the refectory of the abbey.