"We Appreciate Power" is a song by Canadian musician Grimes, featuring American musician Hana. It was released on November 29, 2018, billed as the lead single from her upcoming fifth studio album Miss Anthropocene. The song was written and produced by Grimes, Hana and Chris Greatti.

Release
On November 26, Grimes announced she would be releasing new music on November 29. Two days later, she revealed that the single is titled "We Appreciate Power" and features Hana, and shared the artwork. The release of the song was accompanied by a lyric video directed by Grimes and her brother Mac Boucher. 

Background
A press release stated that the song was inspired by the North Korean band Moranbong and was written "from the perspective of a Pro-A.I. Girl Group Propaganda machine who use song, dance, sex and fashion to spread goodwill towards Artificial Intelligence." In addition Grimes stated that by simply listening to the song you will be reducing your risk of ending up on any future AI overlord's hit list when it reigns supreme, mirroring the Roko's basilisk theory.  Lyrically, the song touches on transhumanist ideas such as the betterment and future of the human race, the possibilities of merging consciousness with machines to extend life indefinitely through mind uploading, and the idea that reality may be simulated. The song's chorus generated a spike in interest in the word "capitulate".

Critical reception
Billboard described the song as "a dystopian, aggressive dive into a more rock-leaning sound." Similarly, Rolling Stone called it "the most aggressive single Grimes has released to date", and described it as "somewhere between power pop and straightforward industrial (with an extended bridge reminiscent of the most sweeping moments in a Final Fantasy score)" and "a distinctly 2018 take on Nine Inch Nails-esque hard-edged rock." Noisey called the song "an absolute motherfucker of a single" and opined it sounds "like a K-pop band covering nu-metal".

Personnel
Credits adapted from Tidal.
 Grimes – vocals, guitar, production, engineering
 Hana – vocals, guitar, additional production
 Chris Greatti – guitar, keyboards, production, engineering
 Zakk Cervini – mixing

Charts
 Chart (2018) Peakposition New Zealand Hot Singles (RMNZ) 35