 

Soundhawk is an American corporation headquartered in Cupertino, California, that introduced a Smart Listening System in June 2014. The Smart Listening System is a set of products designed to help people hear, communicate and connect with greater clarity in noisy situations. It comes with three pieces of hardware: the Scoop (for the ear), wireless microphone and charging case. The pieces are unified by a mobile application that includes over one million auditory profiles users can personalize to their environment.

 Leadership 
Soundhawk was founded by Rodney Perkins, Stanford University School of Medicine, Otologist. He is also the founder of ReSound and the California Ear Institute at Stanford University  Executive leadership at Soundhawk includes Dr. Rodney Perkins as CEO; Drew Dundas, formerly director of Audiology and Assistant Professor of Otolaryngology at UCSF as President and Chief Technology Officer; Steve Manser former engineering leader at Apple, Inc., Palm, Inc., and Hewlett-Packard, as Chief Operations Officer and Vice President of Engineering.  The Soundhawk product was built by a group of former hardware and software engineers from Palm, Inc., Apple, Inc., Hewlett-Packard, and Amazon.com.

 Strategic partners 
Soundhawk is backed by True Ventures, Foxconn Technology Group and other Silicon Valley entrepreneurs.

 Suspension of operation 
Soundhawk has suspended operation as per their official website, which as of October 1, 2016 reads "down for maintenance, check back soon". As of March 2018, support pages are no longer available as the domain name connections have expired; nor can it be found through the Apple Store. Amazon.com also lists the device, but says it's currently not available, and they don't know when it will be.

 Product 

 Smart Listening System 
The Smart Listening System blends consumer technology and hearing science to help people hear, communicate and connect. Soundhawk includes three pieces of hardware: the Scoop, the Wireless Mic and the Charging Case. Unifying the System is a mobile app with patented technology that personalizes Soundhawk to the user and their environments.

 Soundhawk App 
The Soundhawk app is used to set up and personalize the system and is available for download to iOS and Android. The app's patented technology enables many unique hearing profiles to be personalized to the acoustics of different environments.

 Scoop 
The Scoop is a wearable device for the ear that connects with all components of the Smart Listening System™. It uses adaptive audio processing to enhance specific sound frequencies and elevate what the user intends to hear while reducing background noise. Included are four different colored ear tips for fit personalization. The Scoop connects wirelessly to users' phones or tablets via Bluetooth.

 Wireless Mic 
The Wireless Mic is a wireless microphone used to hear a specific sound source in a variety of environments. It picks up the intended sound and delivers it to the Scoop. The Wireless Mic comes with a clip for attaching it to clothing or placing it on a table.

 Charging Case 
The Charging Case is a base for the Scoop and Wireless Mic that protects and charges the system. Depending on use, the Charging Case can recharge the Scoop and Wireless Mic up to two additional times.

Functionality
Soundhawk can be used to help people participate, connect, and actively listen in any environment. Soundhawk can be used in everyday situations like talking on the phone, dining in noisy restaurants, watching TV or attending business meetings and social gatherings. There are three primary ways that Soundhawk can be used:
 Active listening: The Scoop’s dual microphones selectively amplify specific sound frequencies to enhance the user's ability to understand speech while reducing background noise. Soundhawk can be personalized to unique environments while indoors, outdoors, dining or driving, or for various people the user talks to.
 Cutting through noise: Placing the Wireless Mic near a sound source isolates that specific sound in noisy environments or from a distance.
 Hands-free communications: Users can place or receive a phone call, talk hands-free on a smartphone or access Siri® and Google Now directly from the Scoop.