The 2022 FIA World Rally Championship will be the fiftieth season of the World Rally Championship, an auto racing competition recognised by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA) as the highest class of international rallying. Teams and crews are due to compete for the World Rally Championships for Drivers, Co-drivers and Manufacturers. Crews are free to compete in cars complying with Rally1 and Rally2 regulations; however, only manufacturers competing with Rally1 cars homologated under regulations introduced in 2017 are eligible to score points in the Manufacturers' championship.

A significant change to the regulations is planned to be introduced in 2022 as the sport adopts the use of hybrid drivetrains for the first time.

Entrants
M-Sport will develop a new car based on a Ford model. The car will use the engine from the Ford Fiesta WRC. Petter Solberg, the 2003 World Drivers' Champion, announced his intention to enter a manufacturer team in the 2022 championship.

List of planned events
The following rallies are under contract to be run as part of the 2022 World Championship:
RallyRally headquartersSurfaceRef. RACC Rally Catalunya de EspañaSalou, CataloniaMixed Rally ChileConcepción, BiobíoGravel

Changes
Technical regulations
The championship is due to introduce a new set of technical regulations known as "Rally1". The Rally1 regulations will place a greater emphasis on standardised parts than in previous years to make the sport more accessible.

The sport will introduce hybrid drivetrains for the first time. All cars competing under World Rally Car regulations will be required to be fitted with a hybrid system. This will take the form of an e-motor that produces  to 1.6 L turbocharged inline-4 engine and must be used to power the car when travelling around service parks and through built-up areas when driving between stages. Drivers will be free to use the e-motor to offer additional power when competing in a stage, with the FIA dictating how much power can be used and how long a driver can deploy it for. The hybrid system and the software governing its use will be standardised for three years as a way of keeping the costs of competing down. The system will be provided by Compact Dynamics, a subsidiary of Formula E team Audi Sport ABT supplier Schaeffler.

The championship will also introduce a standardised safety structure in a bid to improve safety standards. This will coincide with the homologation requirements being re-written to allow teams to build prototype chassis based on production cars rather than having to adapt a chassis to fit a roadgoing model.