Replit (rep·lit), formerly Repl.it, is a San Francisco-based start-up and an online IDE (integrated development environment). Its name comes from the acronym REPL, which stands for "read–evaluate–print loop". Amjad Masad, Faris Masad, and Haya Odeh co-founded the company in 2016.

Features
Replit allows users to write code and build apps and websites using a browser. The site also has various collaborative features, including capability for real-time, multi-user editing with a live chat feed. It supports over 50 programming and markup languages, including Java, Python, and HTML, enabling users to build apps and websites. The site is integrated with GitHub, a code-hosting platform, providing a way to import and run projects from GitHub. Users can also import projects from Glitch, which provides a similar service to Replit.

History
Replit was created by programmers Amjad Masad, Faris Masad, and designer Haya Odeh in 2016. Programmer Max Shawabkeh was also involved in the creation of Replit, but he departed early on. He was listed as a co-founder alongside Amjad Masad in 2013 and 2014 in various media and on the official company website.

Before creating Replit, Amjad Masad worked in engineering roles at Yahoo and Facebook, where he built development tools. He also helped found Codecademy. Masad had come up with the idea for Replit over a decade before its creation.

In 2009, Masad tried to write every programming language in Python, but it was not practical. He saw great leaps in browser and web technologies and he was inspired by Google Docs web capabilities. He thought of the idea of being able to write code in a browser and make it easy to share it. He spent two years creating an open-source product with Haya Odeh called "pyRepl". This product allowed him to compile languages into Python. This product powered Udacity and Codecademy's tutorials. After becoming an early employee of Codecademy, this project was put off until years later, when he and Odeh decided to revive the project of a programming environment in a browser.

As Replit was taking shape, Masad and Odeh wanted to have "a real environment and not something emulated in the browser." The focus was first directed at the education market, and then later towards professional developers.

Since March 2021, "replit.com" has been the default domain name for the web service replacing the older "repl.it". This change was attributed to Masad's preference that people pronounce the website's name as rep·lit instead of re·pu̇l. Another reason cited by Masad was issues with the ".it" TLD, such as renewal restrictions.