InRule Technology is a software company that offers Business Rule Management System (BRMS) enterprise software productsRymer, John. Gualtieri, Mike. Market Overview: Business Rules Platforms 2011 . Forrester, 2011, p.6 InRule is the only BRMS Certified for Microsoft Dynamics CRM.Pinpoint.Microsoft.com. 2012. 

 History 

InRule Technology’s Chief Executive Officer Rik Chomko and Chief Technology Officer Loren Goodman began exploring the concept of building configurable applications in 1997. That process evolved into giving users the ability to modify calculations, logic and other aspects of their applications without coding effort and developer involvement.IllinoisTech.org. ITA Spotlight: InRule Technology. 2013.
Chomko and Goodman founded InRule Technology in Chicago in 2002. Paul Hessinger joined InRule Technology in 2004 as Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board and served until his retirement in 2015. They work with companies in several markets, including financial services, public sector,Online Sunshine. State of Florida Agency for Health Care Admisistration: Modernization Using a Business Rules Management System. December, 2012 healthcare,Microsoft.com/casestudies.com. Access MediQuip: Medical Implant Device Management Solution Provider Cuts Costs, Increases Business Volume. 2010 and insurance.O'Donnell, Anthony. Insurance & Technology. West Bend Mutual’s SOA-Based Underwriting System Drives Flexibility and Increased Revenue

In 2007, InRule Technology became a charter member of the Microsoft Business Process Alliance.Taylor, James. James Taylor on Everything Decision Management. First Look – InRule Technology. 2008.

In 2014, InRule Technology was named to the Inc. 500|500 list of the nation's fasted growing private companies.

InRule has been recognized as one of Chicago's Best and Brightest Companies to Work For by the National Association of Business Resources from 2014 to 2017.2014, 2015, 2016, 2017

In August 2019, InRule was acquired by Open Gate Capital. 

 Products 
On October 29, 2012, InRule Technology launched InRule for Microsoft Dynamics CRM, which is the first, and to date only, Business Rule Management System Certified for Microsoft Dynamics CRMBoucher Ferguson, Renee. Microsoft Forms Business Process Alliance, Develops BPM Roadmap. EWeek.com, 2007. The program provides components to enable creation and update of rules within Microsoft Dynamics CRM, InRule for Microsoft Dynamics CRM provides a platform for shops that prefer to work with Microsoft’s platforms.Ramachandran, Mani. Product Review: InRule for Microsoft Dynamics CRM. Microsoft Dynamics CRM Community, 2013

With the availability of InRule 4.6 in 2014, the company introduced deployment of InRule through REST services and allowed REST services to be called from InRule.Taylor, James. James Taylor on Everything Decision Management. . 2014 This enables access to data exposed as a REST service and to package up a rule service for RESTful access. The product launch reflected the move of the company’s core audience to use a broader array of technologies despite an earlier focus on .Net.

In 2017, InRule introduced InRule for the Salesforce Platform, as well as a technology partnership with Work-Relay, a Business Process Management (BPM) application built on the Salesforce Platform. https://www.work-relay.com/news/business-process-management-bpm-leader-work-relay-announces-partnership-inrule-technology/ One year earlier the company  introduced InRule for JavaScript, allowing enterprises to run rules on the client-side, server-side or both. 

The software architecture includes multiple components, including irAuthor, the primary authoring tool for creating and maintaining rules; irVerify, a real-time test environment to run and debug rule applications; and irSDK, a set of APIs that allows developers to integrate inRule into their applications. Additionally, irSOA allows users to access the InRule rule engine as a service.Holloway, Simon. Business Rules Management in the Microsoft Business Process Alliance. Bloor Research, 2007. irSOA is now called the irServer Execution Service.