 

The Apple Watch Series 1 and Apple Watch Series 2 are the second-generation model of the Apple Watch. The Apple Watch Series 3 is the third-generation model of the Apple Watch which is the beginning to a new and improved generation of smart watches. This device was released on September 22, 2017, continuing the yearly upgrade followed by Apple's product release rates. As of December 2019, this device can be purchased with the basic feature of GPS for $199. To receive access to the cellular feature, buyers have to pay $299. 

Apple used advertising points to emphasize the need for this product to track fitness goals and have access to LTE with ease. The popular "3 Ring Goal" for tracking the users fitness level while the device is being used has been improved for accuracy and workout plans. Apple Watch Series 3 follows 2016's Series 2 by adding cellular connectivity to an already successful recipe. The four major carriers (AT&T, Sprint Wireless, T-Mobile, and Verizon Wireless) all support Watch and the same phone number as your phone is used.

 Features 
The Apple Watch Series 1 and 2 both had successful sales and product reviews, so Apple added key selling features and made improvements to the connection speed, Bluetooth, other adjustments to create a more dependable device. The main feature is the new built-in LTE cellular connectivity, offering voice and data communication and Apple Music streaming. This feature allows users to receive calls, messages, and other celluar needs from anywhere with a strong enough connection. Apple advertised the ability to make calls when you are out on the water. The watch comes with an electronic SIM card and shares the same mobile number as the user's iPhone. Add-on plans start at $10/month from the four major US carriers.

Hardware
Apple Watch Series 3 has a dual-core Apple S3 processor that is 70% faster than the Apple S2 and enables Siri voice responses. It features a Bluetooth 4.2 vs the 4.0 on older models allowing for a faster and stronger connection to the paired device. The cellular-capable watch has a red digital crown while the non-LTE version has a plain digital crown. It has a built-in NFC chip which can be used for Apple Pay. Apple claims 18 hours of battery life. Each model through Series 3 comes in a 38- or 42-millimeter body, with the larger size having a slightly larger screen and battery. It also includes theISO 22810:2010 water resistant (up to 50 meters)"Review: The absolutely optional Apple Watch and Watch OS 1.0". Ars Technica. Retrieved July 15, 2015. that was newly featured in the Apple Watch Series 2.

 Software 
The Apple Watch Series 3 ships with watchOS 4, which has an updated Heart Rate app (including resting and recovery period monitoring), Workout app (with High Intensity Interval Training), as well as two-way data synchronization with GymKit-integrated cardio fitness equipment from companies such as Life Fitness, Technogym, Cybex, Schwinn, MS Artrix, Stair Master and Star Trac.

 Requirements 
Compatibility depends on the version of watchOS shipped on the device. As of September 2019, the Apple Watch Series 3 ships with watchOS 6 and officially requires an iPhone 6S or later with iOS 13 or later.