Cheng Cheng-chung (; born 9 July 1936) is a Taiwanese weightlifter. He competed in the men's light heavyweight event at the 1964 Summer Olympics.

Biography
Cheng is from the Gangshan District of Taiwan's Kaohsiung. He graduated from a . Cheng was the owner of a watch shop in Gangshan in 1960. In 1959, he served in Taiwan's military. At Taiwan's Provincial Games () in 1958, he represented Tainan and won in the middleweight weightlifting category. Cheng competed in the middleweight category at the 3rd Provincial Weightlifting Championship () in 1959. He did a bench press of , a snatch of , and a clean and jerk of . In total, he lifted  and placed second in his weight category. He competed in an international weightlifting competition in Manila on 27 May 1960 and placed second in the middleweight category. On 27 October 1960, Cheng represented Tainan in Taiwan's Provincial Games () in the light heavyweight division. In the snatch event, he lifted . In the bench press event, he lifted , which broke a competition record. He lifted  in the clean and jerk, which set a national record. In total, he lifted  which set a national record and earned him first place.

Representing the Air Force, Cheng was a corporal when competed at the National Military Games () on 22 December 1960. He lifted a total of , which smashed the national record. Chang competed in the Taiwan-Hong Kong-Philippines Triangle Weightlifting Competition () in May 1961 in the light heavyweight division, where he won the competition and set a competition record by lifting a total of . At the April 1962 Asian Games Weightlifting Trials at the Kaohsiung Gymnasium (), Cheng in three lifts lifted . This broke the Asian Games record and qualified him for the Asian Games.

Cheng competed in the men's light heavyweight event at the 1964 Summer Olympics. After he placed last in Group A, the Central News Agency said he underperformed relative to expectations. He did a military press of , a snatch of , and a clean and jerk of . The total weight he lifted was  which was below his top weight of  at home.