Dominic Harris (born 16 November 1976) is a British artist known for integrating modern technology and classical design in his interactive artworks.

 Background 
Dominic Harris was born in London on 16 November 1976, and grew up in London, Brussels, and Michigan before returning to London in 1995.  Harris attended the Cranbrook Kingswood Upper School, and then trained as an architect at the Bartlett School of Architecture, and has been ARB registered since 2011.

Harris designs and fabricates his artworks at Dominic Harris Studio, a multi-disciplinary practice he founded in 2007. This studio consists of 25 people with diverse backgrounds including architecture, product design, electronics, programming, graphic design, and workshop skills.

Harris uses the resources of his studio for the ongoing development, prototyping and production of his artworks. Harris also oversees the studio's international projects where his fascinations are translated into larger scale projects that span residential, retail, and public art projects.  In 2015, Harris was granted permission by the Walt Disney Company to use their Intellectual Property for the purpose of making new interactive artworks. Harris is the only artist to gain permission to use Disney's back catalogue of characters, and led him to creating his interactive versions of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" and "Mickey and Minnie: An Interactive Diptych".

Harris is fascinated by the idea of using data streams, algorithms, and computer code to generate dynamic and ever-changing artworks. He sees data as a raw material that can be transformed into visual poetry. Many of his installations and sculptures are interactive, responding to the presence and movement of viewers/participants. This creates an immersive experience where the observer becomes part of the artwork itself.https://www.studiointernational.com/index.php/dominic-harris-video-interview-feeding-consciousness-halycon-gallery-london

Harris is also the founding partner of a sister studio in London called Cinimod Studio that creates large commissioned installations, interactive events and lighting designs for large brands.

 Works 
thumbnail|Flutter (2011) artwork by Dominic Harris
thumbnail|Ice Angel (2012) by Dominic Harris
Chess Block (2013) by Dominic Harris
Swell (2019) by Dominic Harris. Commissioned for Royal Caribbean.
 Title  Year  Details  MaterialsOctober Series 2011  Lighting artworks exhibiting an infinity effect of changing colour palettes  Glass, LED, electronics, metal. Four States 2011 Interactive video artwork in which the viewer manipulates black and white depictions of various states of water  Code, electronics, computer, display, 3D camera, metal. Flutter  2011 Interactive video artwork comprising 88 video screens depicting the movement of a Morpho Helena butterfly in flight.  This artwork can be found on public display at the Borusan Contemporary Art Collection Code, electronics, sensors, computer, mirror, metal. Ice Angel 2012 Interactive LED artwork in which the viewer becomes a performer who is depicted with their unique angel wings  Code, electronics, 3D sensor, computer, acrylic, metal. Baby Flutter 2012 A series of interactive artworks depicting various species of butterflies  Code, electronics, display screen, aluminium. Deep Blue Interactive Aquarium  2012 Interactive video artwork depicting a series of aquatic scenes  Code, electronics, computer, 4K touch display, 3D camera, metal. Chess Block 2013 An illuminated colour changing chess board primarily fabricated from optical glass Glass, LED, electronics, stainless steel. Shimmer  2013 A series of illuminated colour studies in which the colours seen varies in relationship to the viewing angle Glass, lightbox, stainless steel. Ruffled  2014 A series of interactive animated studies of various species of birds Code, display screen, electronics, aluminium, acrylic. Stained Glass: Arboretum  2015 A transparent LCD screen artwork in which flower growths appear in interactive response to the viewer  Code, electronics, computer, transparent OLED display, 3D sensor, metal. Flutter Wall  2015 A touch reactive array of butterflies arranged in a grid on the screen  Code, electronics, computer, 4K touch display, 3D camera, metal. Digital Shimmer  2015 A three dimensional LED lighting art sculpture of oscillating colour blends  Code, electronics, GRG, metal. Baby Angel  2015 A visual digital recording of the participants interaction when on Ice Angel  Corian, electronics, code. Vanity Mirror  2015 An exploration of the multiplicity of the image in contemporary society  Cameras, screens, electronics, code, metal. Conductor  2015 A highly interactive artwork allowing the participant to manipulate the planets with a variety of gestures  Code, electronics, computer, display, speakers, metal. Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs  2015 An 8-screen interactive video artwork featuring real-time animated characters from the Snow White and Seven Dwarfs Disney movie.  Made with the permission of The Walt Disney CompanyCode, electronics, computer, display, 3D sensor, metal, acrylicBloomed2016A series of interactive animated studies of various species of flowersCode, display screen, electronics, aluminium, acrylic.Deserted2016A highly interactive digital artwork allowing the viewer to explore a series of desert scenesCode, electronics, computer, 4K touch display, metal.Flutter Hologram2017Electronically holographic display of butterflies projected within a glass bell jarCode, electronics, screen, blown glass, acrylic, ply.Flight is a Waltz: Puppet Flutter2017Electronically interactive model of a butterfly presented within a glass display jar. A collaboration between Harris and puppeteer, Oliver SmartBrass, blown glass, aluminium, code, electronics.Bloomed Wall2017A highly interactive digital artwork allowing the viewer to explore a series of scenes inspired by masters of the Dutch Golden AgeCode, electronics, computer, 4K touch display, 3D sensor, metal.SIMULATED2017An interactive artwork using the resurrected technology of the Nixie tubeNixie tubes, code, electronics, Corian, aluminium.Baby Shimmer2018A study of the colour shifting volumes of light that respond to the movement of the viewer.Glass, aluminium, electronics, acrylic.Mickey & Minnie: An Interactive Diptych2018A two-screen interactive video artwork which allows viewers to act as the catalyst for unique interactions and character narratives from Mickey and Minnie Mouse. Made with the permission of The Walt Disney Company.Code, electronics, computer, 4K touch display, 3D sensor, metal.Swell2019A kinetic light sculpture commissioned for "Spectrum of the Seas", Royal Caribbean cruise ship.Carbon fibre, electronics, code, Swarovski crystal, aluminium.Metamorphosis Soliloquy2020Square format individual studies of different butterfly species realised as digital artworks responsive to the viewer.Code, electronics, display, sensors, aluminium.World Stage2020Large format interactive digital artworks depicting various flags of the world through the use of grids of butterflies.Code, electronics, computer, 4K touch display, sensors, aluminium.Limitless2023An interactive artwork displaying live data from the stock markets in the form of a perpetually growing tower of gold blocks.Code, electronics, computer, 5K vertical touch display, sensors, aluminium.Feeding Consciousness2023A free-standing sculpture in the form of the Tower of Babel that displays images from trending web-search terms as reported by Google.Code, electronics, computer, screens, sensors, aluminium, steel.
221x221px|"Imagine" exhibition at Halcyon Gallery, 2019
Baby Shimmer by Dominic Harris at Design Miami/Basel 2018
Flight is a Waltz: Puppet Flutter (2017) by Dominic Harris and Oliver Smart
219x219px|SIMULATED (10) artwork by Dominic Harris

 Exhibitions 
The works of Dominic Harris have been exhibited internationally, both through direct and gallery representation.

Solo shows:

 "Feeding Consciousness" at Halcyon Gallery, Mayfair, London, UK – 2023
 "US: NOW" at Halcyon Gallery, Mayfair, London, UK – 2020
 "Imagine" at Halcyon Gallery, Mayfair, London, UK – 2019
"5 Year Celebration", Priveekollektie Contemporary Art | Design, London, UK – 2016.
"Moments of Reflection" at PHOS ART + DESIGN, Mayfair, London, UK – 2015

Recent exhibitions include:
 In Plain Sight, 2024 Halcyon Galleryhttps://www.halcyongallery.com/exhibitions/81-in-plain-sight/ 
 Victoria & Albert Museum
 Dublin Science Museum
 Design Miami / Basel
 Design Miami
 Art Miami
 Art 14, London
 PAD Paris
 PAD London
 Art Geneva

 Gallery Representation 

 2010 to 2019:  Dominic Harris was represented by Priveekollektie Contemporary Art | Design, a Dutch gallery based in Heusden, the Netherlands, and with a regular presence on the international art and design circuits.
 2015: Dominic Harris was shown with PHOS ART + DESIGN Gallery, in Mayfair, London, UK.
 2019 – ongoing:  Dominic Harris is exclusively represented by the Halcyon Gallery, an established international gallery based in Mayfair, London.

 Collections 
The majority of Harris's work has been bought by private collectors.  Since 2012 Harris's work is also being acquired by several large institutional collections, including the Borusan Contemporary Art Collection in Istanbul.  Harris's artworks include some of the biggest and most respected international art collectors and are also displayed in public spaces.

 Books 
 A Touch Of Code: Documents the "Beacon" art installation and "Flutter" artwork ()
 Dominic Harris, Artworks, Edition Eight.  ()
Digital Real: Kunst & Nachhaltigkeit Vol 8.