Torbjørn C. Pedersen (born December 19th, 1978) is a Danish traveller and adventurer known for the Once Upon A Saga project: a journey to visit every country in the world without the use of air travel. The project has lasted for over six years, and Pedersen had, as of January 2020, visited 193 of the planned 203 nations. 

 Early life 
Torbjørn Cederlöf Pedersen was born in Kerteminde, Denmark, to Torben Pedersen (Danish) and Ylva Cederlöf (Finnish). The family moved to Toronto, Canada, and later to New Jersey, USA over a period of five years, before returning to Denmark in 1984 where he spent his childhood growing up in Kerteminde and Bryrup before entering business school at Silkeborg Handelsskole, Silkeborg. Pedersen graduated in 1998 and was drafted to the military later the same year, serving as a royal life guard at the royal palaces throughout Denmark. When travelling abroad, Torbjørn is nicknamed Thor.  

 Once Upon a Saga 
In 2013, Pedersen began planning a project which aimed at visiting every country in the world in a single unbroken journey explicitly without the use of air transport.. Graham Hughes has also visited every country in the world, without flying, according to Guinness World Records. Hughes was however permitted to fly home to Britain twice during his journey, as long as he returned to the same airport in order to continue. 

Through the project Pedersen intends to reach every country without flying, while promoting every country and the world in a positive way.

Over the same period of time Pedersen applied for a role within the Emergency Response Unit (ERU) of the Red Cross . Throughout the year he attended various trainings and became a logistics delegate of the ERU and towards the end of the 10 months planning period the Danish Red Cross appointed Pedersen a Goodwill Ambassador. 

On October 10th 2013 at 10:10am (10/10,10:10) Once Upon A Saga began at Dybbøl Mølle in Southern Denmark. Soon after Pedersen crossed into Germany by train and has, in January 2020, reached 193 of the intended 203 countries  on all six inhabited continents without returning home.

He is expected to complete the project and return to Denmark again in 2020 after visiting his last country, the Maldives, in October 2020.

‘Once Upon A Saga’ has earned Pedersen media coverage in more than 100 countries so far. Notable media coverage include VICE, BBC, ABC, Lonely Planet, National Geographic, Forbes, Al Jazeera, The Guardian, News.com.au and RTÉ.

 Red Cross Red Crescent 
Pedersen holds the following roles and memberships in various societies within the International Red Cross Red Crescent Movement:

 Goodwill Ambassador of the Danish Red Cross Society
 Lifetime member of Bahamas Red Cross Society
 Lifetime member of Kenya Red Cross Society
 Honorary member of Seychelles Red Cross Society
 Humanitarian ambassador of Sudanese Red Crescent Society