Stephenson Avenue refers to two separate sections of road in the western suburbs of Perth, Western Australia.

The first section is a  section of dual carriageway linking Scarborough Beach Road to Pearson Street/Jon Sanders Drive in Osborne Park. The second, longer section is a  two-lane road in Mount Claremont used to link central Perth to the West Coast Highway via Hay Street, Underwood Avenue and Rochdale Road.

The two sections of road are to date the only evidence of the originally proposed Stephenson Highway, a controversial highway that was proposed to connect Swanbourne to Innaloo. Evidence of previous attempts to extend the section north of Scarborough Beach Road to Mitchell Freeway can be seen on Landgate aerial photos from 1985, however only the section south to Jon Sanders Drive actually completed to date.

The two roads are named after Gordon Stephenson, an influential person in the development and expansion of Perth through the Metropolitan Region Scheme during the 20th century.

Extension project
Currently underway as of June 2021 is the extension of Stephenson Avenue northwards from Scarborough Beach Road, to connect to Cedric Street and the Mitchell Freeway.

The first phase of construction is by the City of Stirling, and extends the road approximately  to an intersection with the new road of Howe Street. It is to be two lanes in each direction, with on street parking. This is unlike the currently existing section of Stephenson Avenue to the south, which is a controlled access road. There is also to be an intersection with Oswald Street, which is to be extended to the east of Ellen Stirling Boulevard.  Both intersections are to have traffic lights. This phase is aimed to be complete in September 2021.

The second phase of construction, yet to be underway as of June 2021, is by Main Roads Western Australia, and extends the road further, over the Mitchell Freeway to connect to Cedric Street. Stephenson Avenue will have a diamond interchange with the freeway, intended to supersede the freeway's diamond interchange with Cedric Street, which is to be demolished. A new access will be provided from Stephenson Avenue to the Stirling railway station carpark. As part of the same project, the Stirling station bus interchange will have a new bridge added to it, increasing the number of bus stands from 9 to 30.