Christopher M. Spence is a former Canadian educator, author, and former Canadian football player. He is the former Director of Education of the Toronto District School Board and former Director of Education of the Hamilton-Wentworth District School Board.

Biography
Born in England to Jamaican parents, Spence has lived in Canada since he was three years old and received his early education in Windsor, Ontario. He received a Bachelor of Arts degree in criminology from Simon Fraser University in 1985. A running back, he was drafted by the BC Lions in the third round of the 1985 CFL Draft, but his CFL career was ended in 1988 by an Achilles tendon injury.
Spence received a Bachelor of Education degree from York University, a Master of Education degree from the University of Toronto in 1993 and a Doctor of Education degree from the University of Toronto's Ontario Institute for Studies in Education in 1996, which was later revoked due to plagiarism.

He became Director of Education for the Hamilton-Wentworth District School Board on September 1, 2004, and served until July 2009, when he became the Director of Education for the Toronto District School Board.

Plagiarism, resignation and revoking of teaching license
On January 9, 2013, Spence apologized for plagiarizing several passages in an op-ed piece he wrote for the Toronto Star on extracurricular activities. The plagiarism was verified by the Star'''s public editor. Among the plagiarized material was this paragraph lifted from a 1989 opinion piece in the New York Times: "We are challenged through sport to use our minds in guiding our bodies through the dimensions of time and space on the field of play. Learning the skills of sport provides opportunity to experience success." On January 10, 2013, Spence tendered his resignation as director effective immediately after additional incidents of plagiarism in earlier articles and blog entries were uncovered. Passages of his 1996 Ed.D. dissertation were also revealed to have been copied from other sources without attribution; the University of Toronto investigated the allegations and found him guilty of academic dishonesty, stripping him of his doctorate.

On December 20, 2016, the Ontario College of Teachers announced that Spence's teaching license had been revoked as a result of the findings of the investigation.

His Doctor of Education has been recommended to be revoked by an independent tribunal due to 67 counts of plagiarism in his dissertation. On June 20, 2017, an independent tribunal at the University of Toronto recommended that Chris Spence be stripped of his Doctor of Education degree and that he be expelled from the university based on 67 instances of plagiarism in his 1996 doctorate dissertation that show a clear intention to plagiarize such as paragraph after paragraph and page after page of plagiarism that was edited from American to Canadian spelling and edited to appear as his own opinion.

In 2018, Spence lost his fight to keep his PhD. The appeals tribunal stated that the "nature and extent [of plagiarism] found in Spence's thesis is a very serious offence." The matter, however is not settled. His lawyer, Darryl Singer, wrote in an email that Spence intends to seek judicial review of the decision in Ontario divisional court.

Spence successfully appealed the revocation of his teaching licence in 2018 on the grounds that his "'precarious' mental state was not adequately accounted for".  A psychiatric report stated that Spence's ability to function had been affected by "depression and suicidal ideation, related to the evaporation of his marriage and career".

Works
 Skin I'm in: Racism, Sports and Education (Fernwood Publishing Company, 2000, )
 On Time! On Task! On a Mission!'' (Fernwood Publishing Company, 2002, ).