Terry Fossum is an American actor and businessperson. He is best known as the winner of the 2017 reality television series Kicking and Screaming. Fossum is a bestselling author in Wall Street Journal, Amazon, and Barnes & Noble, and on USA Today. Fossum also does business training and speaking engagements across the U.S. and different parts of the world.

 Biography 
Fossum was born in Mission, Texas but raised in McAllen, Texas as one of three brothers, during which time he joined the Boy Scouts of America, where he became an Eagle Scout. He earned a degree in mechanical engineering from Texas A&M University while serving in the Corps of Cadets, following which Fossum became an officer in the U.S. Air Force. He also became the Officer of the Year for the Fairchild Air Force Base and was the Executive Officer for a Group of Nuclear B-52 Bombers.

After the Air Force Fossum founded sales company and the Terry L. Fossum Learning Center in Rwanda. he also started the Terry L. Fossum Scholarships for Underprivileged Youth in McAllen, Texas; providing agricultural training for Malawi, Africa in 2018.

 Television 
In 2017, Fossum appeared on Fox reality television series Kicking and Screaming, a show that paired survival experts with “wilderness impaired partners”. He and his partner Natalie Casanova  won the competition, splitting the $500,000 grand prize. This then led to several million dollars in donations for the Scouts following the series airing. Fossum was also the producer for the film Tiger Lily Is My Little Sister, in which he also acted, and the film Role Prey. Both films centered on the problem of human trafficking.

In 2021, Fossum received the Best Supporting Actor and Fan Favorite award at the Christian Film Festival for his role in the movie Agape. Also in 2021, Fossum published a self-help book titled The Oxcart Technique: Blueprint for Success. 

Fossum has continued to be involved in the Boy Scouts of America, first as a scoutmaster, and eventually as the vice president for programs for the Washington State's Inland Northwest Council. Fossum was married before but then divorced. Today he is married to a woman who has three sons, whose scoutmaster he became. 