Magpasikat () is the annual talent competition segment of the Philippine television variety show It's Showtime, where the hosts and other cast members compete against each other. A week-long anniversary special, it is usually held either a week before the show's anniversary date, October 24, or during the week itself (although the 2021 to 2023 editions were held in November).

The duo Jugs Jugueta and Teddy Corpuz hold the most number of Magpasikat wins with six, followed by Karylle with five wins, and Jhong Hilario and Kim Chiu with four wins.

 Background 
Magpasikat was first held on October 23, 2010, as an anniversary special. Since then, it has become a week-long annual tradition. However, the 2020 and 2021 editions were held in one day due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Magpasikat was also the name of a placeholder show that replaced Showtime in January 2010, when the Movie and Television Review and Classification Board suspended the latter due to an errant remark made by guest judge Rosanna Roces towards teachers. The show had the same format as Showtime, except for the competing groups being composed of celebrities, and only aired for a few days until the suspension was blocked following a temporary restraining order.

 Format 
Except on certain occasions, the It's Showtime cast members and staff are usually divided into five teams by drawing lots. The same method is also used to decide the order of performances. The first team would perform on Monday, the second team on Tuesday, and so on until Friday, with the results being announced by the voice of Big Brother, panel of judges or the ABS-CBN COO for broadcast Cory Vidanes on Saturday. The performances are evaluated by a special panel of hurados (judges). The team with the highest average score will receive the highest cash prize for their chosen beneficiary. The second- to fifth-placing teams will also receive consolation prizes.

 Series overview 
 Magpasikat teams, judges, and resultsYearWinner2nd Place3rd PlaceOther teamsJudges4th Place5th place 2010 Jugs Jugueta and Teddy Corpuz colspan="2"  Anne CurtisKim AtienzaVhong NavarroVice Ganda Luis ManzanoGladys ReyesArnel PinedaGary ValencianoKim Chiu andGerald Anderson 2011 Anne Curtis Billy CrawfordVice Ganda  Jugs Juguetaand Teddy CorpuzKarylleKim AtienzaVhong Navarro Cathy Garcia-MolinaLiz UyJoel CruzManny CalayanVicki Belo 2012 Anne Curtisand KarylleJugs Juguetaand Teddy CorpuzVhong Navarroand Billy Crawford colspan="2"  Coleen Garciaand Eric "Eruption" TaiKim Atienzaand Ryan BangVice Ganda and Jhong Hilario Alfie LorenzoCornelia LeeEula ValdezMaricel SorianoJericho Rosales 2013 Karylle,Jugs Jugueta,and Teddy Corpuz Vice Ganda and Kim Atienza Vhong Navarro,Billy Crawford,and Coleen Garcia Anne Curtis and Jhong HilarioRyan Bangand Eric "Eruption" Tai Amy PerezAi-Ai delas AlasRuffa GutierrezRobert SeñaIsay Alvarez  2014 Billy Crawford,Jugs Jugueta,and Teddy Corpuz Vhong Navarroand Jhong Hilario Anne Curtisand Coleen Garcia Karylle and Kim AtienzaVice Ganda and Ryan Bang Cherie GilJim ParedesPops Fernandez  2015 Vice Ganda,Jugs Jugueta,and Teddy Corpuz Karylleand Jhong Hilario Anne Curtis,Kim Atienza,and Eric "Eruption" Tai Billy Crawfordand Coleen GarciaVhong Navarroand Ryan Bang Amy Perez andMarc LoganTirso Cruz III andEdgar MortizNonong de Andres andLilia Cuntapay  2016 Anne Curtis,Amy Perez,and Joey MarquezRyle, Paulo,Dawn, Miho, Maika,Krissha Vhong Navarroand Jhong HilarioNikko, Jon,Luke, Maris,Jessica, Leyana,Riva Karylle,Jugs Jugueta,Teddy Corpuz, andMariel Rodriguez-PadillaRonnie, Jameson,Mikee, Sammie,Devon, Kelly Vice Gandaand Kim AtienzaZeus, Tom,Chienna, Mica,Nikki, Jane Billy Crawfordand Ryan BangMcCoy, Jimboy,Joana, Kamille,Barbie, Erin Sonny AngaraJolina MagdangalNick OlankaPrecious Lara QuigamanMel Villena  2017 Vhong NavarroNikko, Tom,Bugoy, Kid, Erin,Joana Vice Ganda,Jugs Jugueta,and Teddy CorpuzRonnie, Ryle,CK, Luke,Mica, Krissha Karylleand Jhong HilarioMcCoy, Wilbert,Maru, Dawn,Mikee Anne Curtis,Ryan Bang,and Nadine LustreJameson, Jimboy,Vitto, Franco,Chienna, Kelly Billy Crawford,Amy Perez,and James ReidZeus, Paulo,Rayt, Kamille,Maika, Sammie, Jessica Maricel SorianoMarc LoganIna RaymundoJanno GibbsRory Quintos  2018 Karylleand Jhong HilarioRonnie, Jimboy,Rayt, Chienna,Jessica Vice Gandaand Amy PerezMcCoy, Luke,Wilbert, Krissha,Mikee Anne Curtis and Mariel Rodriguez-PadillaJameson, Ryle,Tom, Kid,Sammie Vhong Navarroand Ryan BangNikko, CK,Paulo, Dawn,Maika Jugs Juguetaand Teddy CorpuzZeus, Vitto,Maru, Mica, Joana Gus AbelgasEmpoy MarquezShalani Soledad-RomuloRey "PJ" AbellanaRonnie Ricketts andMariz Ricketts  2019 Vice GandaMiss Q & A Queens Vhong Navarro andMariel Rodriguez-PadillaHashtags Anne Curtisand Amy PerezBidaman Karylleand Ryan BangTNT Boys, TNT Singers Jhong Hilario,Jugs Jugueta,and Teddy Corpuz Jackie, Ion, Sanrio Edu ManzanoMaria Rachel ArenasShirley Halili-CruzAndy AlvizDiether OcampoRene NapeñasTim YapJoel CruzVicki BeloTina Monzon-Palma  2020 Jhong Hilario,Karylle,and Ion PerezJugs Jugueta,Teddy Corpuz,and Ryan BangVhong Navarro,Amy Perez,and Jackie GonzagaVice Gandaand Kim Chiu colspan="5"    2021 Karylle,Amy Perez,and Kim Chiu  Vice Ganda,Ryan Bang,and Jackie Gonzaga Vhong Navarroand Ogie AlcasidJugs Jugueta,Teddy Corpuz,and Ion Perez colspan="2"  Gary ValencianoCatriona GrayJoel TorreRaimund Marasigan  2022 Jhong Hilarioand Ryan BangCianne Dominguez Vice Gandaand Amy Perez Karylleand Ogie Alcasid Anne Curtis,Jackie Gonzaga,and Ion Perez Jugs Jugueta,Teddy Corpuz,and Kim Chiu Ernie LopezJohn ArcillaJanice de BelenPia MagalonaBaron GeislerDarren Espanto  2023 Jhong Hilario,Kim Chiu,and Ion Perez Anne Curtis,Ryan Bang,and Ogie Alcasid Vhong Navarro,Jugs Jugueta,and Teddy Corpuz Vice Ganda,Jackie Gonzaga,and Cianne Dominguez Karylle,Amy Perez,MC "Muah" Calaquian,and Lassy Marquez apl.de.apOlivia LamasanTirso Cruz IIIJett PanganBarbie Forteza  2024 Ogie Alcasid,Kim Chiu,MC "Muah" Calaquian,and Lassy Marquez Jhong Hilario,Jackie Gonzaga,and Cianne Dominguez Anne Curtis,Jugs Jugueta,and Teddy Corpuz Vice Ganda,Karylle,and Ryan Bang Vhong Navarro,Amy Perez,Ion Perez,and Darren Espanto Freddie M. GarciaRory QuintosGabbi GarciaDonny PangilinanAlice Dixson 

 Summary of Results 
+ Magpasikat wins per performer  Performer/s	 Winner Second place Third place Fourth place Fifth placeJugs Juguetaand Teddy Corpuz	 6 (2010, 2012–2015,2020) 1 (2017) 4 (2016, 2021, 2023,2024)  3 (2018, 2019, 2022)Karylle  5 (2012, 2013, 2018,2020, 2021) 1 (2015) 3 (2016, 2017, 2022) 2 (2019, 2024)  1 (2023)Jhong Hilario 4 (2018, 2020, 2022,2023) 4 (2014, 2015, 2016,2024) 1 (2017)  1 (2019)Kim Chiu 4 (2020, 2021, 2023,2024)    1 (2022)Vice Ganda 3 (2015, 2019, 2020) 6 (2011, 2013, 2017,2018, 2021, 2022)  3 (2016, 2023, 2024)  Vhong Navarro 3 (2012, 2017, 2020) 3 (2014, 2016, 2019) 3	(2013, 2021, 2023) 1 (2018) 1 (2024)Amy Perez 3 (2016, 2020, 2021) 2 (2018, 2022) 1 (2019)  3 (2017, 2023, 2024)Anne Curtis 3 (2011, 2012, 2016) 1 (2023) 5	(2014, 2015, 2018,2019, 2024) 2 (2017, 2022) Ryan Bang 2 (2020, 2022) 2 (2021, 2023)  4 (2017–2019,2024)  1 (2016)Billy Crawford 2 (2012, 2014) 1 (2011) 1 (2013)  2 (2016, 2017)Ion Perez 2 (2020, 2023)  1 (2021) 1 (2022) 2 (2019, 2024)Jackie Gonzaga 1 (2020) 2 (2021, 2024)  2 (2022, 2023) 1 (2019)Ogie Alcasid 1 (2024) 1 (2023) 2 (2021, 2022)  Cianne Dominguez 1 (2022) 1 (2024)  1 (2023) MC "Muah" Calaquianand Lassy Marquez 1 (2024)    1 (2023)Joey Marquez 1 (2016)    Mariel Rodriguez-Padilla  1 (2019) 2 (2016, 2018)  Kim Atienza  1 (2013) 1	(2015) 1 (2016)  Coleen Garcia   2	(2013, 2014)  Eric "Eruption" Tai   1 (2015)  Nadine Lustre    1 (2017) James Reid     1 (2017) Darren Espanto     1 (2024)

 First Decade 
Color Key

 Magpasikat 2010 
The inaugural staging of Magpasikat was held on October 23, 2010. There were five teams that competed against each other: Team Jugs and Teddy, Team Kuya Kim, Team Anne Curtis, Team Vhong Navarro, and Team Vice Ganda. This year's judges were television presenter Luis Manzano, actress Gladys Reyes, singers Arnel Pineda and Gary Valenciano, and the love team of Kim Chiu and Gerald Anderson.

At the end of the episode, the group of Jugs and Teddy was proclaimed as the first Magpasikat winner.

 List of Magpasikat 2010 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Jugs and Teddy Teddy Corpuz and Jugs Jugueta, who are lead vocalists of OPM bands Rocksteddy and The Itchyworms, respectively, gave an ultimate rock concert at noontime as they invited fellow OPM artists Yeng Constantino, Tutti Caringal of 6cyclemind, Marc Abaya of Kjwan and Kean Cipriano of Callalily to perform with them onstage. In addition, Teddy also impersonated rock icon Bamboo. Grand Champion Video  Team Kuya Kim  Kim Atienza performed Francis Magalona's "Mga Kababayan Ko" with actress Alessandra de Rossi, rapper Gloc-9, and the Antipolo Kid Rappers. rowspan="4"  Video Team Anne Curtis Anne Curtis opened her performance with a spellbinding version of Eminem and Rihanna’s "Love the Way You Lie". She then sang Katy Perry’s "Hot n Cold" with renowned singers Led Sobrepeña III and Bugoy Drilon and performed an operatic version of Lady Gaga and Beyonce’s "Telephone" with thespian Robert Seña. Video Team Vhong Navarro Vhong Navarro had an exhilarating dance showdown with other talented dance performers, including Archie Alemania, Jhong Hilario, Izzy Canillo, and Bugoy Cariño. Video Team Vice Ganda Vice Ganda had a beauty pageant-inspired performance with former beauty queens Miss International 2005 Precious Lara Quigaman and Miss Universe 1999 1st runner-up Miriam Quiambao, that concluded with his rendition of Christina Aguilera’s "Beautiful". Video

 Magpasikat 2011 
The second Magpasikat anniversary special was held in the week commencing October 17, 2011. Seven teams competed against each other: Team Karylle, Team Billy, Team Anne, Team Vhong, Team Kuya Kim, Team Vice, and Team Jugs and Teddy. This edition marked the official Magpasikat debuts of Karylle and Billy Crawford after becoming regular hosts earlier in the year. This year's panel of judges include film director Cathy Garcia-Molina, fashion stylist Liz Uy, entrepreneur Joel Cruz, and celebrity doctors Manny Calayan and Vicki Belo.

The team of Anne Curtis was proclaimed as the winner, while Billy Crawford and Vice Ganda were the runners-up.

 List of Magpasikat 2011 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Karylle(October 18, Tuesday) Karylle proved her versatility as a performer when she showed off her Disc jockey skills, hip-hop dance skills,and percussion skills in one production number. She incorporated and made use of different beats and sounds in her performance.  Video  Team Billy(October 18, Tuesday) Billy Crawford began his performance by showing off his exceptional dance skills. He also did several magic tricks. During one of his tricks, he suddenly disappeared, and out of nowhere, "The Master Showman" German Moreno appeared on stage and surprised everyone with his famous line, "Walang tulugan!"2nd Place (tie)Average Score: 9.8 Video Team Anne(October 19, Wednesday) Anne Curtis entertained the audience when she showed off her skills in pole dancing and aerial silk. She also sang Adele’s "Someone Like You" while she was upside-down. She ended her performance with her version of Aerosmith’s "I Don't Want to Miss a Thing". Singer Jed Madela also had a special participation as her moving microphone holder. Grand ChampionAverage Score: 10 Video Team Vhong(October 19, Wednesday) Vhong Navarro performed a Cinderella-inspired production number of Bruno Mars' "Grenade" and got wet and wild while showing off his incomparable dance skills. Toni Gonzaga and Ryan Bang had special participation in his performance. rowspan="2"  Video Team Kuya Kim(October 20, Thursday) Kim Atienza performed his own unique mash-up version of The Beatles’ "Yesterday" and the song "Do-Re-Mi" from "The Sound of Music". He ended his performance by singing APO Hiking Society’s hit song "Do Bidoo" with two of its members, Jim Paredes and Boboy Garrovillo. Video Team Vice(October 20, Thursday) Vice Ganda entertained the audience with a No Other Woman-inspired skit with two other comedians, Pooh and Chokoleit. He was then joined by Derek Ramsay who appeared lying half-naked on a bed and they did an intense scene together. The Unkabogable Star ended his performance with an interpretative dance of "Now That You’re Gone" while doing several costume quick-changes.2nd Place (tie)Average Score: 9.8 Video Team Jugs and Teddy(October 21, Friday) Jugs Jugueta and Teddy Corpuz had a futuristic action-themed production number. Their innovative performance about the battle between two characters and their respective groups made use of different spectacular elements and effects.  Video

 Magpasikat 2012 
The third Magpasikat anniversary special was held in the week commencing October 22, 2012. Six teams competed against each other: Team Anne-Karylle, Team Jugs-Teddy, Team Kuya Kim-Ryan, Team Coleen-Eruption-Baby Joy, Team Vice-Jhong, and Team Billy-Vhong. This edition marked the official Magpasikat debuts of Jhong Hilario, Ryan Bang, Coleen Garcia, and Eric "Eruption" Tai after being added as regular hosts earlier in the year as part of the show's reformatting. Hilario and Bang, however, have appeared as guest performers for Team Vhong in the previous editions: Hilario in 2010 and Bang in 2011. Additionally, this is also the first and only Magpasikat participation of "Showtime Baby" Joy Rendon. The judges for this year's competition were talent managers Alfie Lorenzo and Cornelia Lee, actresses Eula Valdez and Maricel Soriano, and actor Jericho Rosales.

At the end of the week, the teams of Anne and Karylle, Jugs and Teddy, and Billy and Vhong all received perfect scores from the judges and were declared as co-winners, making 2012 the first year that there were multiple Magpasikat winners.

 List of Magpasikat 2012 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Anne-Karylle(October 22, Monday) Anne Curtis and Karylle astounded the audience when they became circus performers. Their spectacular and heart-stopping circus performance, which paid tribute to the four elements of nature (land, fire, air, and water), included eating shipworm and crickets, fire dancing, aerial acrobatics, and synchronized swimming. Grand Champion (tie)Average Score: 10 Video  Team Jugs-Teddy(October 23, Tuesday) Jugs Jugueta and Teddy Corpuz had the studio audience and other hosts dance to their parody of Psy's "Gangnam Style", titled "Epal Ang 'Yong Style". Child star Bugoy Cariño and actress Cristine Reyes also joined them in their extremely fun production number. Grand Champion (tie)Average Score: 10 Video Team Kuya Kim-Ryan(October 24, Wednesnday) Kim Atienza and Ryan Bang entertained the audience with a funny parody of Anne Curtis's winning Magpasikat performance from the 2011 edition. Just like Anne, Ryan did pole dancing and aerial silk while on harness, and Kuya Kim was the microphone holder just like Jed Madela. Singer Angeline Quinto also had a special participation and sang "I Don't Want to Miss a Thing". rowspan="3"  Video Team Coleen-Eruption-Baby Joy(October 24, Wednesnday) Coleen Garcia and Eric "Eruption" Tai, together with Baby Joy Rendon, showed the different dances of New Zealand, India, Africa, and the Philippines. Comedian Jon Santos, model Andy Smith, and dancer Gab Valenciano also participated in their performance. Video Team Vice-Jhong(October 25, Thursday) Vice Ganda and Jhong Hilario started their performance with a reenactment of a famous scene from "Soltera". The duo also showcased their talent in singing, dancing and acting (through several funny skits). Singer Kedebon Colim and stand-up comedian Negi joined them in their performance. Actor Paulo Avelino also had a surprise shirtless appearance that delighted the studio audience. Video Team Billy-Vhong(October 26, Friday) Billy Crawford and Vhong Navarro performed an extremely futuristic dance number. Their performance showed different forms of illusion with the help of high-technology tricks. The pair also showed off their incomparable skills in dancing while performing an innovative dance with lights. Grand Champion (tie)Average Score: 10 Video

 Magpasikat 2013 
The fourth Magpasikat anniversary special was held in the week commencing October 21, 2013. Five teams competed against each other: Team Ryan-Eruption, Team Teddy-Karylle-Jugs, Team Billy-Vhong-Coleen, Team Vice-Kuya Kim, and Team Jhong-Anne. The fourth team's Kim Atienza, however, was not present during the anniversary special due to sickness and only appeared in video footage shown before his team's performance. The Magpasikat judges for this year were television host Amy Perez, comedienne Ai-Ai de las Alas, actress Ruffa Gutierrez, and thespians Robert Seña and Isay Alvarez-Seña.

At the end of the week, Team Billy-Vhong-Coleen won 3rd place, Team Vice-Kuya Kim won 2nd place and Team Teddy-Karylle-Jugs was proclaimed as the grand champion.

 List of Magpasikat 2013 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Ryan-Eruption(October 21, Monday) Ryan Bang and Eric "Eruption" had a UFC-inspired performance and battled each other on the stage while dancing. Eruption also showed off his music skills by playing the piano while Ryan danced ballet. The duo also astounded the audience when they danced upside-down.  Video  Team Teddy-Karylle-Jugs(October 22, Tuesday) Teddy Corpuz, Karylle, Jugs Jugueta and the rest of Team TKJ surprised everyone with a very mind-boggling production number. They sang a song in gibberish and made a mess on stage that left the audience and judges puzzled. However, when the video of their performance was played in reverse, everyone realized that they actually performed the theme song of It's Showtime. Grand ChampionAverage Score: 10 Video Team Billy-Vhong-Coleen(October 23, Wednesday) Billy Crawford, Vhong Navarro, and Coleen Garcia showed off their dance skills in a futuristic production number. The trio wowed everyone with their trippy dance number that made use of high-technology equipment like laser lights. 3rd Place Video Team Vice-Kuya Kim(October 24, Thursday) Vice Ganda performed solo looking in mirror and sang "Frozen" by Madonna but still proved he didn't want to be outdone by the other groups and performance song "Wild" (no rap edit) by Jessie J it's performed death-defying acrobatic stunts. Actor JC de Vera also made a special participation performance song is "Applause" Artpop (2013) by Lady Gaga.2nd Place Video Team Jhong-Anne(October 25, Friday) Jhong Hilario and Anne Curtis switched genders in a series of dramatic dance performances, telling a heartwarming love story. Ellen Adarna and Boy Abunda also appeared in pre-taped videos. After the performance, the two also showed video footage of their preparations for the performance, as well as some bloopers.  Video

 Magpasikat 2014 
The fifth Magpasikat anniversary special was held during the week commencing October 20, 2014. Five teams competed against each other: Team Karylle-Kuya Kim (or Team Kim-Rylle), Team Vhong-Jhong, Team Anne-Coleen (or Team AnneLeen), Team Vice-Ryan (or Team RyCe), and Team Teddy-Billy-Jugs (or Team TBJ). Regular co-host Eric "Eruption" Tai was originally supposed to co-lead the fourth team but was unable to participate. Unlike previous editions' five-person lineup, this year's panel of judges comprises only three personalities: singer Pops Fernandez, APO Hiking Society member Jim Paredes, and actress Cherie Gil.

At the end of the competition, the team of Anne and Coleen received the 3rd prize, the team of Vhong and Jhong got 2nd prize, and the team of Teddy, Billy, and Jugs was proclaimed the grand champion.

 List of Magpasikat 2014 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Karylle-Kuya Kim(October 20, Monday) Karylle and Kim Atienza entertained the audience and judges with a fun and educational performance. They incorporated a medley of hit songs with eco-friendly and do-it-yourself science experiments into their production number. The duo ended their performance with a special appearance from personality Dionisia Pacquiao and the announcement of a mobile app.  Video  Vhong-Jhong(October 21, Tuesday) Vhong Navarro and Jhong Hilario performed a friendship-themed contemporary dance using The Jackson 5’s "I'll Be There". Actress Yassi Pressman danced with the two men while Jericho Rosales made a cameo appearance in their presentation. Mid-presentation, a pre-taped video played, recalling how Vhong and Jhong’s friendship grew over the years. In the video, they were represented by their "mini-mes" and "kalokalikes". While the video played, the two dancers worked on separate canvasses, painting mystery images. At the end of the presentation, they threw white powder on the canvasses, revealing their paintings of one another.2nd Place Video Team Anne-Coleen(October 22, Wednesday) Anne Curtis and Coleen Garcia started their performance by beatboxing and recording it. They also became a two-woman band and played musical instruments like the piano, xylophone, guitar, and drums. The two surprised the audience and judges when they bravely performed death-defying aerial acrobatic stunts. 3rd Place Video Vice-Ryan(October 23, Thursday) Vice Ganda and Ryan Bang performed an emotional and heartwarming performance that made the audience and judges shed some tears. The pair touched their hearts with an original composition about equality, a song that was created with the help of composer Gerard Salonga. The ABS-CBN Philharmonic Orchestra also provided the harmonious melody for the song.  Video Team Teddy-Billy-Jugs(October 24, Friday) Teddy Corpuz, Billy Crawford, and Jugs Jugueta had an amusing, confusing, and unconventional performance. They created their own noontime variety show entitled Whatchamacall8. In their mock game show, one audience member was able to take home 90,000 pesos. The love team of Nadine Lustre and James Reid was also featured in their performance. Grand Champion Video

 Magpasikat 2015 
The sixth edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "Happy ANIMversary!", was held during the week commencing October 19, 2015. Five teams that competed against each other: Team Karylle-Jhong (or Team KJhong), Team Vhong-Ryan, Team Vice-Jugs-Teddy (or Team VJT), Team Anne-Kuya Kim-Eruption, and Team Billy-Coleen (or Team BiCol). The five groups were judged by a special set of celebrity hurados, divided into three pairs: Sakto hosts Amy Perez and Marc Logan, '70s matinée idols Tirso Cruz III and Edgar Mortiz, and Forevermore love team Nonong de Andres and Lilia Cuntapay.

At the end of the week, third place went to the group of Anne, Kuya Kim, and Eruption, second place went to the group of Karylle and Jhong, and the group of Vice, Jugs, and Teddy was proclaimed as the grand champion.

 List of Magpasikat 2015 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Karylle-Jhong(October 19, Monday) Karylle and Jhong Hilario performed an emotional all-original musical skit. It is an inspiring story about two siblings who got separated when they were still young. Isay, played by Karylle, became a successful singer while Kiko, played by Jhong, became a member of a robbing syndicate. Karylle's husband and Sponge Cola vocalist Yael Yuzon had a special participation in their performance as a member of the live band.2nd Place Part 1Part 2  Team Vhong-Ryan(October 20, Tuesday) Vhong Navarro and Ryan Bang did an innovative dance and comic act. John Lloyd Cruz and Angelica Panganiban surprised the audience and judges when they joined the duo in their production number. Child star Nhikzy Calma also participated in the performance.  Video Team Vice-Jugs-Teddy(October 21, Wednesday) Vice Ganda, Jugs Jugueta, and Teddy Corpuz created a mind–boggling performance that utilized several optical illusions, which has never been done on any live program. The trio also sang to the tune of their original composition performance song "Kapit Lang" by Jugs Jugueta, Teddy Corpuz, Vice Ganda. Their performance also featured pre-recorded cameo appearances from Wenn V. Deramas, James Reid, Nadine Lustre, and Coco Martin. Grand Champion Video Team Anne-Kuya Kim-Eruptiom(October 22, Thursday) Anne Curtis, Kim Atienza, and Eric "Eruption" Tai did an impressive performance that talked about the environment. Eruption and Anne became ninja warriors trying to defeat Khu-Lim-Lim, played by Kuya Kim. Towards the end of their performance, Kuya Kim's hair was shaved on live television to impart a message about climate change. 3rd Place Video Team Billy-Coleen(October 23, Friday) Billy Crawford and Coleen Garcia showed their love for each other in an intimate and daring dance number. The real-life couple proved their incomparable dancing skills to the audience and the judges when they performed a difficult dance routine on top of a trampoline. Their performance that recounted their love story through abstract art also featured pre-recorded voice-overs of the two reading a poem about love.  Video

 Magpasikat 2016 
The seventh edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "HaPITOgether", was held during the week commencing October 17, 2016. Five teams competed against each other, distinguished by team colors: Team Billy-Ryan (Pink), Team Vhong-Jhong (Green), Team Karylle-Jugs-Teddy-Mariel (Red), Team Anne-Amy-Joey (Blue), and Team Vice-Kuya Kim (Yellow). This edition marked the official Magpasikat debuts of Mariel-Rodriguez Padilla, Amy Perez, and Joey Marquez after being added as regular hosts earlier in the year. Rodriguez-Padilla, however, was only able to participate via a pre-taped performance due to her pregnancy. Each team also comprises members of It's Showtime dance groups Hashtags and GirlTrends. The Magpasikat judges for this year's competition were musical director Mel Villena, beauty queen Precious Lara Quigaman, film director Nick Olanka, singer-actress Jolina Magdangal, and Senator Sonny Angara.

At the end of the week, the team of Anne, Joey, and Amy emerged as the grand champion. The team of Vhong and Jhong placed second while the team of Karylle, Jugs, Teddy, and Mariel placed third.

 List of Magpasikat 2016 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Billy-Ryan (Pink)(October 17, Monday) Billy Crawford and Ryan Bang and their team performed a jam-packed presentation that started with a comedy skit with the special appearance of actor Piolo Pascual. During their skit, Billy unexpectedly got a kiss from Ryan on the lips. Their performance also had a game show entitled Yak Ganern that involved disgusting creatures. Billy then pretended to walk out in the middle of their performance, and Ryan had to chase and convince him to finish their number. Their presentation ended with an explosive dance number from Billy, along with the other members of their team, Hashtags McCoy de Leon and Jimboy Martin, and GirlTrends Barbie Imperial, Erin Ocampo, Kamille Filoteo, and Joana Hipolito. 5th PlaceAverage Score: 8.6 Video  Team Vhong-Jhong (Green)(October 18, Tuesday) Vhong Navarro and Jhong Hilario's team had an unconventional performance that combined mixed martial arts and state-of-the-art visual effects. Eddie Garcia also appeared in a pre-recorded video in which he turned over to Vhong the "golden stick". Their performance was a tribute to janitors for their hard work and dedication. The duo was joined by Hashtags members Nikko Natividad, Jon Lucas, and Luke Conde, and GirlTrends members Jessica Marasigan, Leyana Magat, and Riva Quenery. Several janitors also graced the It's Showtime studio towards the end of the performance.2nd PlaceAverage Score: 9.8 Video Team Jugs-Teddy-Karylle-Mariel (Red)(October 19, Wednesday) Jugs Jugueta, Teddy Corpuz, Karylle, and their team spread good vibes when they performed an electronic Pinoy music festival-inspired number. Mariel Rodriguez-Padilla introduced each segment of their performance via a series of pre-taped videos. The other members of their team were Hashtags Ronnie Alonte and Jameson Blake, and GirlTrends Mikee Agustin, Sammie Rimando, Devon Seron, and Kelley Day.

Note: Team member Loisa Andalio was not able to participate due to prior commitments. 3rd PlaceAverage Score: 9.2 Video Team Anne-Amy Perez-Joey (Blue)(October 20, Thursday) Anne Curtis, Amy Perez, and Joey Marquez's team had a death-defying and hair-raising performance. Tyang Amy and Tsong Joey, together with Hashtags Paulo Angeles and Ryle Santiago, and GirlTrends Miho Nishida and Maika Rivera, opened their number by dancing in the hallways of the ABS-CBN Studios. They also did anti-gravity aerial dance routines inside the It’s Showtime studio. The highlight of their performance, however, was Anne performing a breathtaking and heart-stopping dance routine with GirlTrends Dawn Chang and Krissha Viaje while hanging outside the insanely high ELJ Communications Center Tower. Grand ChampionAverage Score: 10 Video Team Vice-Kuya Kim (Yellow)(October 21, Friday) Vice Ganda and Kim Atienza's team had a short but very heartfelt performance that tackled gender equality and acceptance. a performance song "Fix You" by Coldplay. "A man is equal to the church, and is equal to the state, therefore, equal to any other man." was the main message of their number. Child actor Izzy Canillo was also part of their performance, playing the role of a young gay kid who was always reprimanded by his father, played by Kuya Kim. The kid grew up and became Vice Ganda, who was successful in both love and career. Eventually, he was accepted by his father for who he truly is, proving that, at the end of the day, love will always win. The other members of the team were Hashtags Tom Doromal and Zeus Collins, and GirlTrends Nikki Gonzales, Jane de Leon, Mica Javier, and Chienna Filomeno. 4th PlaceAverage Score: 9.0 Video

 Magpasikat 2017 
The eighth edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "Let's Celebr8!", was held in the week commencing October 16, 2017. Five teams competed against each other this year and were designated team colors as well: Team Billy-Amy-James (Green), Team Vice-Jugs-Teddy (Pink), Team Anne-Ryan-Nadine (Yellow), Team Vhong (Blue), and Team Karylle-Jhong (Red). This edition marked the official Magpasikat debuts of James Reid and Nadine Lustre after being added as regular hosts earlier in the year. Both of them, however, have appeared as guest performers in previous editions: in 2014 for Team Teddy-Billy-Jugs and in 2015 for Team Vice-Jugs-Teddy. Like in the previous edition, members of the dance groups Hashtags and GirlTrends were also included in the team lineup. Furthermore, the Blue Team was originally co-led by Joey Marquez and Mariel Rodriguez-Padilla, but they were unable to participate this year due to his health condition and her maternal duties, respectively. This edition's panel of judges include actresses Maricel Soriano and Ina Raymundo, broadcast journalist Marc Logan, actor Janno Gibbs, and film director Rory Quintos.

At the end of the competition, the team of Vhong Navarro was selected by the hurados as the grand champion. Coming in second place was the team of Vice Ganda, Jugs Jugueta, and Teddy Corpuz, while Karylle and Jhong Hilario's team placed third.

 List of Magpasikat 2017 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Billy-Amy-James (Green)(October 16, Monday) Billy Crawford, Amy Perez, James Reid, and the rest of Green team delivered a spectacular magical performance. The audiences and judges were delighted with elegant and colorful renaissance-inspired costumes and extravagant set design. But what left the audience totally shaken were the magic tricks they exhibited, such as Amy's costume costumes, James’ escape from a huge container filled with water, and Billy teleporting his whole team with a few waves of his wand. The other members of the team were Hashtags Zeus Collins, Paulo Angeles, and Rayt Carreon, and GirlTrends Kamille Filoteo, Maika Rivera, Sammie Rimando, and Jessica Marasigan. 5th PlaceAverage Score: 7.2 Video  Team Vice-Jugs-Teddy (Pink)(October 17, Tuesday) Vice Ganda, Jugs Jugueta, Teddy Corpuz, and their team left viewers awestruck and broke the internet when Teddy proposed to and married his wife Jasmine on national television. After Jugs and Vice performed a song and a reverse poem about love, Teddy surprised Jasmine, their kids, and the madlang people as he bent on one knee and asked his wife, “Will you marry me again?” Teddy's ultimate romantic gesture did not end there, as he swore his undying devotion and exchanged “I dos” with Jasmine. Hashtags Ronnie Alonte, Ryle Paolo Santiago, Charles Kieron, and Luke Conde, and GirlTrends Mica Javier and Krissha Viaje were also part of the performance.2nd PlaceAverage Score: 9.8 Video Team Anne-Ryan-Nadine (Yellow)(October 18, Wednesday) Anne Curtis, Ryan Bang, Nadine Lustre, and their team spread good vibes while inviting the audience to join their "love parade" in a highly synchronized and colorful performance captured live in one continuous shot. Their performance was also accompanied by an all-original song, "Join the Love Parade", that featured original rap parts by Hashtag Jimboy Martin and Ryan. Love, unity, and happiness were the messages of Team Yellow's performance, which also marked the first time Anne and Nadine showcased on television their roller skating skills. Also part of the parade were Hashtags Jameson Blake, Vitto Marquez, and Franco Hernandez, and GirlTrends Kelley Day and Chienna Filomeno. 4th PlaceAverage Score: 9.0 Video Team Vhong (Blue)(October 19, Thursday) Vhong Navarro put a creative twist on the term "one-man show" as he performed a powerful dance routine and mirror illusion act built around the themes of isolation and loneliness. Vhong offered a visual treat for viewers as he performed synchronized dance moves with Hashtags Nikko Natividad, Tom Doromal, Bugoy Cariño, and Kid Yambao, and GirlTrends Erin Ocampo and Joana Hipolito, all dressed up to look like him with the help of prosthetics, mimicking a mirror's reflection. The performance, which Vhong said was a tribute to people who feel alone, brought the hurados and even the hosts to tears. Grand ChampionAverage Score: 10.0 Video Team Karylle-Jhong (Red)(October 20, Friday) Karylle and Jhong Hilario ended the week with a bang as their team performed a live musical about an unconventional love story between two different insects to show that love knows no shape, form, or class. The musical combined romance, comedy, and drama to tell the story of a lowly cockroach, played by Jhong. He falls in love with a conceited caterpillar, portrayed by Karylle, who is blinded by her own beauty that she refuses the cockroach's affection. But when she transforms into a butterfly and is no longer considered the most beautiful caterpillar in the world of insects, she discovers her own flaws and learns about the meaning of true love. Also playing characters in the play were Hashtags McCoy de Leon, Wilbert Ross, and Maru Delgado, and GirlTrends Dawn Chang and Mikee Agustin.

Note: Team member Jon Lucas was not able to participate. 3rd PlaceAverage Score: 9.2 Part 1Part 2

 Magpasikat 2018 
The ninth edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "and 9... Thank You!", was held in the week commencing October 15, 2018. Five teams competed against each other: Team Jugs-Teddy, Team Vice-Tyang Amy, Team Anne-Mariel, Team Vhong-Ryan, and Team Karylle-Jhong. Aside from the hosts, Hashtags and GirlTrends members were once again included as team members. This year's judges were broadcast journalist Gus Abelgas, actor-comedian Empoy Marquez, politician Shalani Soledad-Romulo, actors Rey "PJ" Abellana and Ronnie Ricketts and singer .

The team of Karylle and Jhong Hilario was hailed as this year's champion. The team of Vice Ganda and Amy Perez came in second, while the team of Anne and Mariel placed third.

 List of Magpasikat 2018 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Jugs-Teddy(October 15, Monday) Jugs Jugueta, Teddy Corpuz and their team performed an original comedy-drama skit with live sound effects and voiceover. Their performance about a father who will do everything to make his son happy features a portion of an Asian drama, educational show, a newscast, a game show, a commercial break, a future version of hit series FPJ's Ang Probinsyano, and It's Showtime. Joining the team were Hashtags members Zeus Collins, Vitto Marquez, and Maru Delgado, and GirlTrends Joana Hipolito and Mica Javier. 5th PlaceAverage Score: 7.6 Video  Team Vice-Tyang Amy(October 16, Tuesday) Vice Ganda and Amy Perez's group delivered a colorful, yet meaningful and inspiring stage performance. The team did a song and dance number, which included a trampoline dance routine and rain effects. But more than just another production number, it also sent a powerful message to viewers to be the greatest they can be in order to reach their dreams. Other team members include Hashtags members Mccoy de Leon, Luke Conde, and Wilbert Ross, and GirlTrends members Krissha Viaje and Mikee Agustin.2nd PlaceAverage Score: 9.2 Video  Team Anne-Mariel(October 17, Wednesday) Anne Curtis and Mariel Rodriguez-Padilla showcased a death-defying aerial show inspired by the musical film The Greatest Showman, cleverly dubbed as "The Greatest Show Ma-Anne" as it transformed the stage into a mini circus and impressed viewers with their heart-stopping routine. The group wowed with their colorful costumes and acrobatic routines. Curtis and Rodriguez impressed the judges and the studio audience with their aerial dance moves. Joining their performance were Hashtag members Jameson Blake, Ryle Santiago, Tom Doromal, and Kid Yambao, and GirlTrends members Sammie Rimando and Kamille Filoteo. 3rd PlaceAverage Score: 9.0 Video  Team Vhong-Ryan(October 18, Thursday) Vhong Navarro and Ryan Bang's team performed a dazzling lights spectacle injected with a touching narrative that tackles the issue of bullying. Being inclusive, understanding, and having the willingness to help those that are being bullied, as well as showing its possible fatal consequences, was their overall message of their haunting turn on the stage that ended by flashing the words "stop bullying." Joining their act was Hashtags members Nikko Natividad, Charles Kieron, and Paulo Angeles, and GirlTrends' Dawn Chang and Maika Rivera. 4th PlaceAverage Score: 8.8 Video  Team Karylle-Jhong(October 19, Friday) Karylle, Jhong Hilario and their team performed an original musical play; a sequel to their performance last year that tells the story of a cockroach and a caterpillar tackling self-acceptance and gender equality. The performance also shows the unconditional love of a mother. Joining the team were Hashtags members Ronnie Alonte, Jimboy Martin, and Rayt Carreon, and GirlTrends' Chienna Filomeno and Jessica Marasigan. Grand ChampionAverage Score: 9.4 Video 

 Magpasikat 2019 
The tenth edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "Sampu-Sample", was held in the week commencing October 22, 2019 at the Newport Performing Arts Theater in Pasay. Five teams competed against each other: Team Anne-Tyang Amy, Team Karylle-Ryan, Team Jhong-Jugs-Teddy, Team Vhong-Mariel, and Team Vice. Respectively, other cast members accompanied each group: BidaMan finalists; Tawag ng Tanghalan singers; Jackie, Ion, and Sanrio; Hashtags; and Miss Q and A Queens. This year's panel of judges was composed of ten individuals, the most for any edition, including Movie and Television Review and Classification Board chairwoman Rachel Arenas, broadcast journalist Tina Monzon-Palma, veteran choreographer Andy Alviz, host Tim Yap, entrepreneur Joel Cruz, celebrity dermatologist Vicki Belo, actor Diether Ocampo, and the head judge host-actor Edu Manzano.

Team Vice was proclaimed the grand champion, winning P1 million and a vacation package. Coming in second place was the team of Vhong Navarro and Mariel Rodriguez-Padilla, winning P700,000, while Anne Curtis and Amy Perez's team placed third, winning P600,000. The teams of Karylle and Ryan Bang, as well as the team of Jugs Jugueta, Teddy Corpuz, and Jhong Hilario, meanwhile, received P500,000 as consolation prizes. All prizes were given to each team's chosen charity.

 List of Magpasikat 2019 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Anne-Tyang Amywith BidaMan(October 22, Tuesday) Anne Curtis and Amy Perez's performance was an ode to It’s Showtime’s tumultuous success in the past decade, as it represents their journey as a blossoming variety show, the challenges and setbacks they went through, how they stood up and moved on together from their downfalls, and being stronger than ever as they mark the newest chapter of their lives personally and professionally together, just like a tree. It opened with Tyang Amy, who was wearing a glittery brown body suit depicting roots, amazingly showing off her acrobatic skills, including a difficult headstand, while the children’s choir were singing The Chainsmokers and Coldplay’s "Something Just Like This". Next, the BidaMan finalists danced to Queen’s "The Show Must Go On" half-naked. A few of them performed stunts when they stuck themselves onto the large metal scaffold while it was being flipped by the other BidaMan members. Curtis then astounded the audience as she seamlessly did death-defying wheel gymnastics alongside BidaMan grand winner Jin Macapagal and a professional Australian gymnast. Their performance ended with Anne sitting inside a spinning spherical framework while belting out “Forever Young”, with Tyang Amy and other team members hanging beneath it, as it was being lifted. 3rd PlaceAverage Score: 9.0 Video  Team Karylle-Ryanwith TNT singers(October 23, Wednesday) Karylle and Ryan Bang, along with the Tawag ng Tanghalan singers, gave a futuristic musical presentation that incorporates a mix of various music genres, from theatrical and ballad to pop and rap. It commenced with a narration of Bang's “sob story”, from being “friend-zoned” by his celebrity crushes and being brokenhearted numerous times to his yearning to be with his dad again—via a short K-drama-inspired video. A short skit by Karylle and Bang ensued, wherein the former talked about their love-hate relationship as friends by belting out her original composition for him. The audience is then visually transported into a 2029 Korean adaptation of It's Showtime, where the Tawag ng Tanghalan alumni, joined by Korean dancer Dasuri Choi, perform hit K-pop songs including Blackpink's "Kill This Love" and "Ddu-Du Ddu-Du", and BTS' "Boy with Luv". Bang's shining moment came when he emerged to the stage dressed like a true K-pop idol and danced to BTS’ "Idol". He then delivered a speech in Korean and gave a Tagalog rap performance that narrated his unforgettable experiences in the Philippines. Team Karylle-Ryan's number concluded with the inspiring original composition "Pabuhat". 4th PlaceAverage Score: 8.8 Video  Team Jhong-Jugs-Teddywith Jackie, Ion, and Sanrio(October 24, Thursday) Jhong Hilario, Jugs Jugueta, and Teddy Corpuz's team took a trip down memory lane through their impressive and colorful throwback-themed production number. Their presentation paid tribute to the '80s era through the concept, costumes, props, and acts they incorporated into it and also brought back some of the fondest moments they shared on the noontime program. The performance started with a pre-recorded comedy skit that introduced a live performance on-stage titled “80’s Showtime”, wherein everything they uttered and sang sounded gibberish, reminiscent of their 2014 Magpasikat performance with Karylle. Hilario, along with Sanrio, Ion, and Jackie, were the performers of this Kaloka-like-inspired segment as they impersonated '80s icons Michael Jackson, Boy George, Randy Santiago, and Madonna, respectively. This was followed by a live continuation of the comedy skit with former It's Showtime cast members dressed as popular '80s figures: Kim Atienza (as "Indiana Jones"), Eric “Eruption” Tai (as Hulk Hogan), Billy Crawford (as Gabby Concepcion), and Coleen Garcia (as Sharon Cuneta). Then after, the reversed version of their bewildering opening number was then played on screen, showing that they actually were performing the hits of the aforementioned music icons. The group concluded their set by performing their rework on It’s Showtime’s theme song and a mash-up of some of the '80s hits with surprise appearances by actress Carmi Martin and Randy Santiago. 5th PlaceAverage Score: 8.0 Video  Team Vhong-Marielwith Hashtags(October 25, Friday) Vhong Navarro, Mariel Rodriguez-Padilla, and the Hashtags brought the audience to the future with an astonishing and heart-fluttering production number. It showcased truly remarkable futuristic exhibitions that signified how technology had tremendously improved 30 years from now and enabled them to provide a post-modern way to spread happiness through “mandroids”, or humanoid robots. Rodriguez-Padilla played the leader of these "mandroids", who then introduced Mandroid VN-01, played by Navarro. A memorable part of the production number was when VN-01 "transformed" into a human who tried to entertain his It’s Showtime family, who were imagined to be in their senior years at that time. This was followed by a series of dance performances by Navarro, the Hashtags, Dawn Chang, and Pilipinas Got Talent Season 5 champion Power Duo. A pre-recorded video of an "elderly" Vhong was flashed on screen, delivering a poignant message to his It’s Showtime family as a life-size projected image of each cast member of the program appeared. The showcase ended when their older counterparts and the other members of the ensemble enclosed Navarro in a huge group hug that formed a heart.2nd PlaceAverage Score: 9.4 Video  Team Vicewith Miss Q and A Queens(October 26, Saturday) Vice Ganda depicted his hair loss story and journey to self-acceptance with a medley of songs that included Radiohead’s "Creep", followed by Willow Smith’s "Whip My Hair" and Destiny’s Child "Survivor", marked by numerous wig and costume changes. The theme of self-love further took center stage as Vice spun in the air and belted out Lady Gaga’s "Hair". The performance showcased his inspirational "hair story", which aimed to share his foremost advocacy of supporting people who have alopecia areata and of imparting self-love towards everyone who has the said condition or is struggling to embrace their true selves. The visually captivating performance also featured Miss Q & A queens and veteran actress Dawn Zulueta, who further brightened up the grandiose production consisting of aerial stunts, visual effects, and the special participation of alopecia patients. Grand ChampionAverage Score: 9.7 Video 

 Second Decade 
Color Key

 Magpasikat 2020 
The eleventh edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "Eleven Up Ang Samahan", was held on October 31, 2020. Four teams competed against each other: Team Jhong-Karylle-Ion, Team Jugs-Teddy-Ryan, Team Vhong-Amy-Jackie, and Team Vice-Kim. This edition marked the official Magpasikat debut of Kim Chiu after being officially added as regular host in September. Furthermore, this also marked Ion Perez and Jackie Gonzaga's first Magpasikat as leaders after being promoted to regular hosts earlier in the year. They both previously appeared as team members of Team Jhong-Jugs-Teddy in last year's ceremony. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there was no panel of judges.

For the first time, all teams were declared grand champions. Additionally, this is the second year that there were multiple winners, after the third edition of Magpasikat in 2012.

 List of Magpasikat 2020 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Karylle-Jhong-Ion Karylle, Jhong Hilario, and Ion Perez's production number showed how strong and resourceful Filipinos are when faced with challenges and problems in life. It showed how livelihoods were affected because of the pandemic, while still exhibiting the undying resilience of Filipinos. With the help of child stars Aaron “Yorme” Sunga and Scarlet Snow Belo in an introductory online class skit, their team gave a glimpse of the colorful culture as they depicted the lives of ordinary Filipinos: Mang Jhong, a cheerful jeepney driver; Aling Karylle, a talented balut vendor; and Mang Ion, a romantic ice cream vendor. In a festive production number, Mang Jhong and Mang Ion danced to "Beep, Beep" and "Mamang Sorbetero", respectively, while Aling Karylle sang "Balut, Penoy". They also incorporated Filipino folk dances like cariñosa, maglalatik, and tinikling into their number. The mood then shifted to gloom as a montage of pandemic-related news flashed on the screens. The characters lamented on how the current situation has terribly affected them, but at the same time, they exhibited the undying resilience of us Filipinos, who are not only able to find something to still be happy about during these trying times, but are also able to find other ways to provide for their families. During the soliloquies, Alex Calleja, Vice Ganda, and Mahal had voice cameos as the jeepney, the ice cream cart, and a hatched duckling, respectively. KaladKaren then made a special appearance as the host of the fictional program "May Paraan", presenting how the three characters stood up from being toppled down by the pandemic and used their skills and resources in order to move forward in life. The presentation ended with an inspiring performance of the original composition "Aahon". Zsa Zsa Padilla also made a surprise appearance in a closing skit as the teacher of Scarlet and Yorme. Grand Champion (tie) Video  Team Jugs-Teddy-Ryan Jugs Jugueta, Teddy Corpuz, and Ryan Bang imparted a very moving message that even though this pandemic has caused live performances to temporarily halt, music will never stop. They gave an epic concert treat as they mounted a "Battle of the Bands"-themed number dubbed "Project 11: Tuloy Ang Tugtugan". However, instead of having their respective bands on the show, the trio had themselves as bandmates by projecting pre-recorded videos of them in various appearances as they took on the different positions in a band. Anne Curtis made a special appearance as the emcee in a series of pre-recorded videos, introducing each band. The first to perform was "School of Jugs", who performed The Itchyworms’ "Gusto Ko Lamang Sa Buhay", followed by "Teddy University", who played Rocksteddy’s "Superhero" and the "Ryan Band" who amused with the song "Abang-abang". They then rocked the stage as they moved on to the epic band showdown, wherein the three of them sang an uplifting yet headbanging original composition along with pre-recorded appearances from Curtis and various music artists: Apl.de.ap of Black Eyed Peas, Andrea Manzano of This Band, I Belong to the Zoo, Zel Bautista of December Avenue, Jeff Bolivar of Soapdish, Kitchie Nadal, Ebe Dancel, and Raymund Marasigan. In the middle of the performance, Bang also played the flute. Grand Champion (tie) Video  Team Vhong-Amy-Jackie Vhong Navarro, Amy Perez, and Jackie Gonzaga pay tribute to Filipino teachers who were passionate about their craft and didn't give up despite the challenging times. The performance commenced with the trio continuously walking along a consistently changing backdrop while wearing personal protective equipment. They then introduced themselves one-by-one as the three inspiring teachers who showed admirable passion not just in their profession but towards their students as well. First was Vhong, who depicted Teacher Velcher Castillo, a high school teacher from Isabela who's known for giving away crayons to his students after receiving a heartbreaking note from one of them. Next was Jackie, who portrayed Teacher Iam, the dedicated pre-school teacher who's doing her best to conquer the challenges of this pandemic. And lastly, Tyang Amy, who pierced our hearts as Teacher Lovely, the teacher who does not only have to face the challenges of distance learning, but also provide for the needs of her ill child. After rending our hearts with those true-to-life stories, the three emerged on the stage wearing shirts with "Sti11 2gether A2Z" emblazoned on them and performed a dance number. Several teachers from different parts of the country joined them virtually as pre-recorded videos of them dancing were shown Grand Champion (tie) Video  Team Vice-Kim Vice Ganda and Kim Chiu relayed a very relevant message to everyone about grieving and depression. Vice Ganda performed various songs while Kim did an interpretive dance. As Vice and his alter-ego Viceral pierced our souls with their rendition of Linkin Park’s "In the End" and Madonna’s "Frozen", Kim, who was wearing an embellished cream dress, was seen dancing with full emotions on a huge sandbox. Cladded in a glittery all-black ensemble with a studded mesh face cover and long train with the word "grief" emblazoned on it, the former surely was the representation of negative emotions. On the next gap, Kim was seen dancing in a seemingly confined space, while Vice was singing the slowed-down version of Kylie Minogue’s "Can't Get You Out of My Head". She then went on to throw red paint on the transparent film. As they went inside two separate boxes, a pre-taped video of them separately submerged in the water flashed on the screen, signifying their reawakening. The two stepped out of their box with a costume change to white ensembles, representing renewed hope. The performance ended with Vice belting out Lady Gaga’s "Million Reasons" as Kim and the other dancers finished their interpretative dance. Grand Champion (tie) Video 

 Magpasikat 2021 
The twelfth edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "Labindala-Woah! 12 Taong Saya at Pagsasama", was held on November 27, 2021. There were four teams that competed against each other: Team Karylle-Amy-Kim (or Team K.A.K.), Team Vhong-Ogie (or Team VhOgie), Team Jugs-Teddy-Ion (or Team Loyal), and Team Vice-Ryan-Jackie (or Team Mag-iina). The first team's Karylle, however, was only able to participate via a pre-taped performance. This edition marked the official Magpasikat debut of Ogie Alcasid after being added as regular host on November 13. This year's judges were singer Gary Valenciano, beauty queen Catriona Gray, actor-director Joel Torre, and musician Raymund Marasigan.

The team of Kim Chiu, Amy Perez, and Karylle emerged as the grand champion, with the team of Vice Ganda, Ryan Bang, and Jackie Gonzaga placing second.

 List of Magpasikat 2021 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Karylle-Amy-Kim Karylle, Amy Perez, and Kim Chiu's team lit up the stage in gold to celebrate women in their performance. Their empowering presentation commenced with a montage of Pinays who made their marks in the field of sports – namely, first-ever Olympic gold medalist Hidilyn Diaz, Nesthy Petecio, Bong Coo, Elma Muros-Posadas, Mikee Cojuangco-Jaworski, and Dyan Castillejo – featuring some of their victorious moments and their inspiring messages not only to the athletes like them, but also to all Filipino women. Female athletes were seen doing their routines on the stage where the huge letter standees that spelled “G-I-N-T” and a huge metal ring adjacent to it were erected. Tyang Amy entered and danced while on the ring as the tune of Rivermaya’s "Liwanag Sa Dilim" blared, while Kim astounded us with her dance interpretation of SB19’s "Go Up" along with other dancers. Anne Curtis also provided guest voice-over before Kim took the stage. Karylle then emerged to the stage in an immaculate white gown with cape as she sang her self-composed song titled "Kababaihan", which aims to pay homage to women athletes and show their support to them and all Pinays. As her performance approaches its end, her gown literally glowed into different colors, which resembled fireworks. After girl group 4th Impact performed Sarah Geronimo’s "Tayo", Kim and Amy went back onstage to dance again, with Kim showcasing her skills in playing the drums, which also ended their performance. Grand ChampionAverage Score: 9.42 Video  Team Vhong-Ogie Vhong Navarro and Ogie Alcasid impressed viewers with their Squid Game-inspired performance showcasing the importance of traditional Filipino games weaved into songs and dances. The performance commenced with a skit wherein they both played dual roles – Ogie as the mother and the son, while Vhong was the father and the other son. As they refused to listen to their parents’, their gadgets suddenly malfunctioned and their setup shook, and they were transported to a game field by a then-anonymous gamemaster, who told them, “kaka-computer n’yo ‘yan!” The gamemaster welcomed them to “SKID Games”, wherein they had to play a series of Pinoy street games and they were divided into two teams: Team Bibo headed by Vhong and Team Perfect by Ogie. Team Bibo was the first one to play, with Vhong and his Street Boys co-members playing piko projected on the floor as they danced to Gary Valenciano’s "Awit at Laro". Team Perfect, on the other hand, was assigned to play hide-and-seek, wherein he and his teammates Lara Maigue, Jeremy Glinoga, and Tawag ng Tanghalan alumni Reiven Umali and Sam Mangubat, as well as their surprise guest Regine Velasquez-Alcasid, sang a parody version of Moira Dela Torre’s "Tagu-taguan" as they moved around the makeshift walls. Both teams were then seen having fun playing “patintero” at the ABS-CBN rooftop, which was succeeded by the performance of El Gamma Penumbra as the gamemaster explained how playing games is parallel to life. Ebe Dancel surprisingly emerged onstage singing "Lipad" as Vhong and Ogie were seen floating mid-air while hanging on their respective kites. In the end, it was revealed that the game master was Jhong Hilario, who, along with the “parents” reminded everyone, particularly the younger generations, how important it is to keep these street games alive amid the continuous changing times. 3rd Place (tie) Video  Team Jugs-Teddy-Ion Jugs Jugueta, Teddy Corpuz, and Ion Perez turned their performance into a Madlang Pi-Poll segment, letting the audience decide what they would do. They created a short action-comedy film and sought the help of the madlang people as their characters went on odd and ridiculous adventures. And they're able to successfully do it the interactive way, just like how it's done in said It’s Showtime segment. As they perplexedly searched for their stolen eggs and birds, gamemaster Joey Marquez, who they called "Tsong-Its", he dared them to take on various challenges by having to choose between two options with the help of the judges, hosts, and the virtual audiences. Their adventure started upon agreeing to pick and take the red ball. From wearing casual clothes in their opening skit, they channeled The Matrix as they were cladded in all-black ensembles and entered the stage while riding on a hoverboard, scooter, and motorcycle. They then had to submerge themselves in mud to regain the red egg and fight the wicked goons to get their green egg. The trio also had to sustain gunshots and overcome their fear of snake in order to take back their blue egg. After triumphantly retrieving their missing eggs, they performed the Parokya ni Edgar song "Don't Touch My Birdie" as online personalities Pamela Kaye and Glenn Krishnan, with It’s Showtime dancer Neri Lopera, emerged on the stage wearing angel wings and handed them one chicken each. 3rd Place (tie) Video  Team Vice-Ryan-Jackie Vice Ganda, Ryan Bang, and Jackie Gonzaga reminded viewers to spend time with their loved ones and gave some of them who lost loved ones a chance to say goodbye. At the onset, Ryan and Jackie were seen arguing regarding their supposed rehearsal for their number. Vice Ganda stopped them and told them that they should exert their best in everything they do in order to also deliver a great performance to the viewers. Ryan and Jackie went on to groove to A-ha’s "Take On Me", with popular online personalities Pipay and Whamos taking turns with them as they go in and out of the makeshift wall with doors and windows they used as a backdrop. Vice then had entertained with his standup comedy opposite an XB Gensan member, and sang a duet version of "Take On Me" with Darren Espanto. Youtuber Ivana Alawi then made a surprise appearance as she played Vice's counterpart. The mood eventually shifted to solemn and gloom in the second part of their skit, wherein Jackie and Ryan were both able to showcase their dramatic chops, hinting that something bad happened to Vice. Jackie quickly went out of the studio and rushed to another to impress with an emotive interpretative dance to Fra Lippo Lippi’s "Beauty and Madness" that made use of special effects. Singer Kyla then emerged onstage singing Josh Groban’s "To Where You Are", while Ryan exhibited his skills in playing the piano. Vice Ganda, through a voice-over, revealed the theme of their performance, giving the audience time to grieve for lost loved ones amid the health crisis. This was followed by Vice Ganda’s soulful rendition of Charlie Puth and Wiz Khalifa’s "See You Again" along with Tatalon Choir on the rooftop of ABS-CBN. A montage of several people was also shown as they wrote their farewell messages to their dearly departed family members and relatives on white balloons, which they eventually released to the skies as they surrounded Vice while he was singing.2nd Place Video 

 Magpasikat 2022 
The thirteenth edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "TRESElebrate", was held during the week commencing November 14, 2022. This year marked the return of the traditional week-long celebration, after the two previous editions were only held for a day due to the restrictions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Five teams competed against each other: Team Anne-Jackie-Ion, Team Jhong-Ryan (or Team Ko-Fi), Team Jugs-Teddy-Kim, Team Vice-Amy, and Team Karylle-Ogie. This year's panel of judges comprises ABS-CBN Foundation executive Ernie Lopez, actors John Arcilla and Baron Geisler, actress Janice de Belen, show business personality Pia Magalona, and singer Darren Espanto.

At the end of the competition, the team of Jhong Hilario and Ryan Bang was announced as winner, with the team of Vice Ganda and Amy Perez in second place and the team of Karylle and Ogie Alcasid in third place.

 List of Magpasikat 2022 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Anne-Jackie-Ion(November 14, Monday) Anne Curtis, Jackie Gonzaga, and Ion Perez delivered a truly heartwarming story entitled "Ang Nanay Ko Ay Dyosa" that pays tribute to all moms and their ever-shining love. With the special participation of Maalaala Mo Kaya host Charo Santos-Concio through her mellifluous voiceover, a montage was first shown which features snaps and clips of celebrity and ordinary moms with their children, including Anne's. The live presentation started off with Anne singing a lullaby version of Coldplay’s "A Sky Full of Stars" to her daughter, played by Queenzy Calma. They were in their silk sleepwear and were surrounded by plenty of glimmering lights, happily dancing and playing, when suddenly, a tornado came and took the little girl away. As she began looking for her, Anne was only able to retrieve the glowing star that she gave to her as a gift. In pursuit of finding her daughter, Anne went on a whimsical adventure. Her first stop was in Planet Neona guarded by Jackie, who mesmerized audinece with her breathtaking aerial silk dance while cladded in a multicolor neon body suit and flower crown that symbolizes a butterfly. However, Anne wasn’t able to find her child there. She then proceeded to Planeta Deserta, which was manned by Ion who performed acrobatic moves on a steel scaffolding while appearing fierce in his all-black ensemble. Still unable to find her child, Anne went on to travel the rest of the galaxy. She ran and did acrobatic routines mid-air while suspended in harness, with the staircase scene wherein she let herself freely fall as one of the most noteworthy parts of the show. As she gained consciousness after her exhausting quest, she found herself in the darkest world in the universe where she was also able to retrieve the glowing star. Now cladded in a white gown, Anne made the whole room shimmer when she raised the star and finally found her daughter. This ensued to their heartwarming reunion, with Anne crying as she once again sang "A Sky Full of Stars". Ion, Jackie, and the other dancers went back onstage and danced along with them. It ended with the voice over reiterating Charo's opening spiel, "Dahil ang totoong ilaw ng anak ay ang kanyang ina. Kumikislap, kumikinang, kahali-halina, katulad ng isang dyosa". 4th PlaceAverage Score: 8.65 Video  Team Jhong-Ryan(November 15, Tuesday) Jhong Hilario and Ryan Bang showcase not just how tightly bonded they are, but the beautiful and colorful culture and heritage of Philippines and South Korea through their diverse and star-studded performance. They commenced their cultural show by appearing onstage in traditional costumes of their respective countries, with Jhong in barong tagalog and Ryan in hanbok. They performed a skit where they virtually visit top tourist spots in the Philippines, wherein Jhong made Ryan experience some of the activities usually done in those places. Sibling child stars Mela and Stella Francisco emerged onstage as they danced to BINI’s cover of "Da Coconut Nut" and played Pinoy street games (sipa, piko, and luksong baka) with Jhong and Ryan. Love team KD Estrada and Alexa Ilacad then appeared on stage for a number that showcased Filipino customs like bayanihan and harana, while actress Kaori Oinuma and It's Showtime co-host Cianne Dominguez also graced the show to represent MassKara and Panagbenga festivals, respectively. After their tour around the Philippines, it was Ryan’s turn to take Jhong around his homeland South Korea. Child star Chunsa Jung then stepped out the stage to dance to Seventeen’s "Left & Right" and played the traditional Korean game "tuho". They then showcased taekwondo with singer-dancer Joao Constancia and entertained with a depiction of korean drama by incorporating Korean translations of notable lines from Filipino movies in their intense dialogues. They also treated the audience to a mini K-pop concert experience by having pop group TFN perform their song "Amazon" live. Video messages from K-Pop stars Sandara Park, Thunder of MBLAQ, Nancy McDonie of Momoland, TAN, and Lapillus are then shown as they expressed their well-wishes for the program's 13th anniversary and their admiration to Filipinos. The montage also included interviews with translator Sandra Jung, Philippine Ambassador to the Republic of Korea Maria Theresa Dizon-De Vega, and Filipino veterans who participated in the Korean War. Jhong then performed a Korean traditional dance with a group of female dancers while they were dressed in hanboks, and played the buk, a Korean traditional drum. Ryan, on the other hand, performed Filipino folk dances together with a group of folk dancers. The presentation ended with everyone dancing to "Sarap ng Buhay", performed by music group Bayang Barrios at ang Naliyagan. Grand ChampionAverage Score: 9.35 Video  Team Jugs-Teddy-Kim(November 16, Wednesday) Jugs Jugueta, Teddy Corpuz, and Kim Chiu delivered an OPM rock concert-themed production. They started off by showing a video shot at the rooftop of ABS-CBN, wherein the three tried to tickle us with their witty words of wisdom and reminded us how music keeps us company in everything that we go through in life. Aptly called "RockPasikat", the live production number commenced with Kim and a group of dancers hauntingly dancing to Classical music from singer Elaine Duran. She then let herself be pulled out from the enormous skirt she shared with the ensemble by gripping onto a harness and went on to perform aerial dance routines. Singer Janine Teñoso emerged onstage, belting out Sampaguita’s "Nosi Balasi". She was joined afterwards by Jugs, who sang while jumping on a trampoline. This was followed by a performance of "Moon" from rapper Nik Makino and Teddy. Filipino rock icons then graced the stage, including Lougee Basabas of MOJOFLY, Hannah Romawac of SessiOnroad, Acel Bisa of Moonstar88, and Aia De Leon of Imago performing Kitchie Nadal’s "Bulong", alongside Six-Part Invention. They were succeeded by Argee Guerrero of I Belong to the Zoo and Jai Singson of Agsunta's duet of "Puso" by Sponge Cola. Jugs, Teddy, and Kim then went on to synchronically show off their amazing drumming skills while getting soak in water dripping from the ceiling. Despite getting drenched, the trio proceeded on singing an original composition by Teddy, as they returned inside the studio. Francis Reyes of The Dawn provided the guitar solo, followed by Ian Tayao of Queso who gave the song a touch of metal rock with his growl. The mini-concert was then joined by more special guests: hitmaker Adie, rapper Kritiko, ex-Kulay member Radha Cuadrado, Color It Red vocalist Cooky Chua, and singer Jason Dy. Jugs, Teddy, and Kim once again took on the makeshift revolving stage, which the dancers turned for the three to execute their backward stage dive and to include the audience in the frame. 5th PlaceAverage Score: 8.63 Video  Team Vice-Amy(November 17, Thursday) Vice Ganda and Amy Perez delivered a powerful message that they incorporated in every part of their breathtaking production. It started with a synchronized dance number courtesy of the talented A-Team dancers. A montage of people doing blue-collar jobs was then flashed on the screen, with Vice expressing through voiceover that they dedicate their presentation to those people who are mainly using their hands at work. Tyang Amy was the first one to appear onstage, showing off her dancing skills in a black embellished dress. Along with the dancers, they did routines that resembled sewing and measuring lengths, representing tailors. After a quick costume change, Amy began to dance ballroom in her glittery red frock with their guest star Enchong Dee. After Tyang Amy's splendid dance number, Vice then dominated the stage in his black and gold avant-garde number. The segment, which represents manicurists, began with someone putting glitters on Vice's studded gold fingernails and was then joined by the dancers in gold costumes, who were able to perfectly execute their coordinated hand routines and successfully created an illusion behind him as he sang "Unholy" by Sam Smith and Kim Petras. Singer KZ Tandingan joined him onstage, also dressed in a black and gold outfit as well as gold nails on their fingers. They also paid tribute to construction workers by having some of the dancers act like them, which served as an introduction to Tyang Amy's second dance number, wherein she and the dancers executed a synchronized hand and hip-hop routines while in their heavy-duty suits. Vice returned to the stage, but this time in a black-and-white ensemble with an enormous headdress. He was accompanied by differently-abled dancers in wheelchairs. The rest of dancers rejoined them to perform another harmonious arm routines. As the upbeat music subsided, a deafening silence permeated the studio for 50 seconds as Jasmine Gabriel spoke to the audience through sign language. In a dance routine, everyone onstage went on to do sign languages that convey "put your hand on me", "applause", and "I love you". Tyang Amy and Enchong returned to the stage and continued dancing, as well as KZ who belted out a portion of their final song.2nd PlaceAverage Score: 9.23 Video  Team Karylle-Ogie(November 18, Friday) Karylle and Ogie Alcasid brought an amusing and colorful retro-inspired musical titled "Dito Sa Puso Ko", which featured the timeless and legendary music of Ogie himself. The trio of Nonong Ballinan, Jerald Napoles, and Benj Manalo in multicolored ensembles enthusiastically welcomed the audience to "4ever Mall", the setting of this wonderful extravaganza that was totally popping in colors. It started off with a perky performance of "NakakaLokal" by Mandy, played by Karylle, along with the back-up dancers who were in vibrant retro outfits. Ogie then emerged onstage with a guitar, wearing a black and white costume, and an enormous wig that resembled his character Norman's glum and bland life after the love of his life ghosted him. The trio introduced him as a musician who lost his hope and found it difficult to rise up from his misfortune, so people started calling him "Norman The Loser". As they encouraged him to start finding his lost love, Norman serenaded everyone with his classic hit "Mahal Kita Walang Iba". That indeed captured the heart of the ever-animated Mandy, who spoke to him about happy ending and forever even though he got his heart broken a lot of times. Benj, Jerald, and Nonong tried to help by hollering his past flames, with Regine Velasquez-Alcasid as the first one to heed the call. Cladded in a green dress, pink thigh-high boots, and white wig, she belted out "Hanggang Ngayon" as her character still harbors feelings towards Norman despite being “friend-zoned” by him. Just when she thought that the time had finally come for them, he told her that he loves her as a friend. The second girl to respond to their call was Jolina Magdangal-Escueta, who was in a bright red and yellow dress and sang a lively version of "Nandito Ako", as her way of reminding him that she's there for him "as a friend". As they summoned the woman who loved Norman for the third time, Melai Cantiveros-Francisco suddenly appeared behind the hurados who were sitting then among the live audiences. Norman and dancers performed blues and jazz versions of "Kailangan Ko’y Ikaw", which was followed by Melai's performance of the Magandang Buhay theme song along with Jolina and Regine. Bituin Escalante then emerged onstage in a funky get-up, and was introduced as the woman who loved him, too, but circumstances were against them. She and Norman sang a mash-up of "Bakit Ngayon Ka Lang" and "Pangako". After the duet, Mandy advised him that he must always give his all when it comes in love and proceeded to sing an original composition about letting yourself to fall in love. A woman's voice was then heard on 4ever Mall's PA system, searching for Norman. It appeared to be Zsa Zsa Padilla, whose character Zaza is Norman's long-lost love and Mandy's mother. In a grand twist of fate, Mandy was revealed to be their daughter. The three wicked stepsisters of Zaza, portrayed by Miss Q and A alumni led by comedian Brenda Mage, then arrived and expressed how they object to their relationship, even after more than two decades of taking her away from him. But this time, Zaza is determined to give their relationship a second chance as she still loves, and performed “Sa Kanya”. With the help of the people from 4ever Mall who drove them away, they were able to get their happy ending. Norman reprised "Mahal Kita Walang Iba", but this time with his family. Benj, Jerald, and Nonong once again went back onstage to remind everyone that "forever" and "happy ending" cannot only be found between two people, but also among family, friends, community, and countrymen. The production capped off with the entire cast performing "Dito Sa Puso Ko", as he switched to a multicolored costume. They also reprised "NakakaLokal" as the cast members took their bows. 3rd PlaceAverage Score: 9.18 Video 

 Magpasikat 2023 
The fourteenth edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "1-4 Ever", began on November 6, 2023, and ended on November 11, 2023. The groups were first revealed on November 3, 2023. For this year's competition, five teams competed with each other: Team Vhong-Jugs-Teddy (or Team JTV), Team Karylle-Amy-MC-Lassy (or Team KALM), Team Anne-Ogie-Ryan (or Team ARO), Team Vice-Jackie-Cianne (or Team VJC), and Team Jhong-Kim-Ion (or Team JKI). This edition marked the official Magpasikat debuts of Cianne Dominguez, after being one of the team members for Team Jhong-Ryan last year, and the comedic duo of MC Calaquian and Lassy Marquez. Furthermore, it also marked Vhong Navarro's return to the competition after his hiatus. Meanwhile, this year's judges were Filipino-American singer and Black Eyed Peas member apl.de.ap, actress Barbie Forteza, The Dawn frontman Jett Pangan, television and film director Olivia Lamasan, and actor and Film Development Council of the Philippines chairperson Tirso Cruz III.

The grand prize for this year's competition was  for the champion's beneficiary, while the prizes for the second to fifth-placing groups were  (second placer),  (third placer), and  (fourth and fifth placers, as runners-up), respectively. Team JKI consisting of Jhong Hilario, Kim Chiu, and Ion Perez were declared this year's Magpasikat grand champion, with an average score of 9.6 out of 10. Their victory marked Hilario's second consecutive win from last year and fourth overall, Chiu's third overall win, and Perez's second win. Meanwhile, Team ARO consisting of Anne Curtis, Ogie Alcasid, and Ryan Bang were declared as second placers, with an average score of 8.6 out of 10, while Team JTV consisting of Vhong Navarro, Jugs Jugueta, and Teddy Corpuz were declared as third placers, with an average score of 8.2 out of 10. Team VJC consisting of Vice Ganda, Jackie Gonzaga, and Cianne Dominguez were declared fourth placers with an average score of 7.4 out of 10, while Team KALM consisting of Karylle, Amy Perez, MC Calaquian, and Lassy Marquez were declared fifth placers with an average score of 6.2 out of 10.

 List of Magpasikat 2023 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch  Team Vhong-Jugs-Teddy(November 6, Monday) Vhong Navarro, Jugs Jugueta, and Teddy Corpuz paid tribute to iconic Filipino comedians through their performance powered by artificial intelligence. Teddy, Jugs, and Vhong opened their performance by impersonating three iconic comedians: Redford White, Babalu, and Dolphy, respectively. The three hosts performed the theme songs of their respective shows or films: Buddy en Sol for White, Oki Doki Doc for Babalu, and Home Along Da Riles for Dolphy. Following Vhong's performance as Dolphy, their performance appeared to 
"finish" with confetti filling the air, surprising the audience. Subsequently, a replay of their performance was shown with the three hosts'faces swapped with the comedians they impersonated using deepfake technology.

The trio continued to impersonate the comedians as their faces were swapped with the comedians' faces. In the final part of their performance, they sang an original composition while presenting a slideshow of various Filipino comedians. The roster included Apeng Daldal, Ben Tisoy, Bentong, Bernardo Bernardo, Cachupoy, Carding, Chicháy, Chokoleit, Dely Atay-Atayan, Don Pepot, Elizabeth Ramsey, Gary Lising, Ike Lozada, Joy Viado, Mang Tomas, Palito, Panchito, Pipoy, Porkchop Duo, Richie D'Horsie, Sammy Lagmay, Soxie Topacio, Subas Herrero, Tado, Tintoy, Noel “Ungga” Ayala, and Zorayda Sanchez. The hosts' faces were then transformed to resemble more comedians: Bert "Tawa" Marcelo, Myrna "Tiya Pusi" Villanueva, Willie Nepomuceno, and German "Kuya Germs" Moreno through Jugs; Mely "Miss Tapia" Tagasa, Joseph "Blakdyak" Formaran, and Augusto "Chiquito" Pangan through Vhong; and Dencio Padilla, Yoyoy Villame, and Rene Requiestas through Teddy. Actress-comedian Nova Villa then made a surprise special appearance. Finally, the AI-generated faces of all the featured comedians were shown on screen for the remainder of Team JTV's performance.

Team Vhong-Jugs-Teddy's performance marked the first time that generative artificial intelligence technology was used in a Magpasikat number. The performance utilized three high-end desktop computers each having an Nvidia GeForce RTX 4080 GPU and 64GB of RAM provided by computer retailer PC Express, and a fork of the roop deepfake software. 3rd PlaceAverage Score: 8.2 Video  Team Karylle-Amy-MC-Lassy(November 7, Tuesday) Karylle, Amy Perez, MC Calaquian, and Lassy Marquez emphasized the value of family through Team KALM's whimsical and heartwarming musical performance. The team opened their performance with the original composition entitled "All I Need is My Family," featuring singer Roselle Nava and her two children, along with singer Fana and her nephew Fabio. Karylle, Amy, Lassy, and MC joined them afterward, along with It's Showtime "Batang Cute-po" Argus Aspiras. The skit chronicled the story of a modern family composed of the four hosts and Argus, who played siblings. However, Argus had to be left behind by his brothers and sisters under the care of his imaginary friend "Lulu" as they went to work. Seeing how sad Argus was,"Lulu", a computer-generated character (who was, after the performance, revealed to be voiced by actor David Licauco), suggested for them to follow his siblings to work to see how they're doing through Argus’ imagination. They initially checked on MC, who works as a security guard at a bank, which turned into a magical forest. He then performed with boy band BGYO as they sang their song "The Light". Lulu and Argus went to Amy next, who serves as a nanny to an affluent family living in a mansion. She then tap-danced to Taylor Swift’s "Shake It Off" opposite famous impersonator and drag queen Taylor Sheesh. "Batang Cute-pos" Kulot and Jaze also appeared in a skit that followed the performance. The two best friends then flew to the faraway seas to visit Lassy, who works as a seafarer. The comedian pulled off a sultry dance with girl group BINI as they performed their song "Strings". And lastly, they came to Karylle's workplace, which was at a hospital where she serves as a nurse. The hospital then transformed into a battleground, as they depicted how health workers have to combat not just fatigue, but also sickness. She represented it by performing Fifth Harmony’s "Boss". This segment featured surprise appearance from actresses Iza Calzado, Sunshine Dizon, and Diana Zubiri. At the end of each performance, a voice-over emphasized that they were doing it all for Argus, no matter how hard they worked. Towards the end of the performance, the five of them reunited, and Argus expressed his understanding that their work was for his future. The four members of the group apologized to Argus for their work commitments. The show concluded with an encore performance of "All I Need is My Family", featuring all members of the ensemble cast. 5th PlaceAverage Score: 6.2 Video  Team Anne-Ogie-Ryan(November 8, Wednesday) Anne Curtis, Ogie Alcasid, and Ryan Bang's Team ARO conveyed an ever-relevant message of healing through their inspiring and astonishing spectacle. The production commenced with a montage of good news that the world has received recently, as well as screenshots of tweets about the theme "The World is Healing". The introductory clip concludes with the entire video being rewound, revealing a text displayed on a dark background that reads "or is it...?" Anne, Ryan, and Ogie then performed an original composition about "healing". Following that, Ryan took the stage for an interpretative dance on a rotating platform, accompanied by the song "Stand By Me", that symbolizes his healing through loving. Subsequently, Ogie flawlessly did stunts mid-air while being held by a harness and even put himself upside down against a makeshift wall onstage. He was joined by vocalists Dingdong Avanzado, Nyoy Volante, and Jed Madela as they sing Eraserheads' "Huwag Kang Matakot". The segment signifies the healing his fears by trusting. Last, is Anne, performed a breathtaking aerial spiral act. She did this while "Batang Cute-po" Imogen Cantong performed her rendition of Coldplay’s "Fix You".  As she descended from the spiral, her younger sister and actress Jasmine Curtis-Smith surprised everyone with her entrance and took her turn to the spiral as Anne watched her from the revolving platform. Anne returned to the spiral again to join Jasmine and they ended the set by sharing a warm embrace. This seemingly depicted Anne’s healing from her challenges by believing and with the help of family. Finally, the performance culminates with an encore of their introductory song, eventually joined by the rest of their ensemble.2nd PlaceAverage Score: 8.6 Video  Team Vice-Jackie-Cianne(November 9, Thursday) Vice Ganda, Jackie Gonzaga, and Cianne Dominguez delivered a creative and dramatic depictions of their respective journeys in chasing their dreams and going on different paths as life goes on. Vice Ganda opened their number as he sings Coldplay’s “A Head Full of Dreams” while clad in a robotic costume, standing on a platform suspended mid-air. She then uttered a monologue about dreams, followed with a clip showcasing the three's younger selves, expressing aspirations for their future. This featured a young Jackie aspiring to become a flight attendant, with visuals of her being bathed by her mother in a bathtub. This leads to Jackie Gonzaga’s solo exhibition, accompanied by Sia's "Bird Set Free". Dressed in an all-white ensemble, she performed a sultry dance while inside a water-filled bathtub with a group of dancers as she tries to escape from them. Jackie manages to attach herself to a harness that pulls her up to the ceiling of the studio where she performs her aerial dance. The second part showcased a young Cianne, dreaming of becoming a beauty queen. Dressed in a voluminous red gown, Cianne sang Christina Aguileras "Beautiful". She was then lifted mid-air via harness, along with the dancers in white dresses hanging by a gigantic dreamcatcher attached to the ceiling. The final performance was Vice's, as his younger self expressed a desire to become a lawyer. Accompanied by Jvke's "Golden Hour", he is then seen standing inside a massive virtual reality box on the stage in a different costume, wherein he chronicled his journey in chasing his old ambition and eventually finding himself taking on a different path and becoming successful in it. In an emotional segment, the three of them returns to stage one-by-one in different costumes as they imagine themselves entering a portal where they’re able to meet their younger selves shown on separate screens. The trio then conveyed heartfelt messages to their younger selves before their mothers joined in, sharing their own touching messages. The presentation of Team VJC concluded with the entire ensemble, including their younger selves, performing "A Million Dreams" from "The Greatest Showman", with the surprise appearance of former It's Showtime co-hosts Billy Crawford and Coleen Garcia, along with their child Amari. 4th PlaceAverage Score: 7.4 Video  Team Jhong-Kim-Ion(November 10, Friday) Jhong Hilario, Kim Chiu, and Ion Perez performed an exhilarating, edgy number that fuses contemporary dance and parkour to present the sad realities of mobile technology, a straightforward but relevant and bold attempt to open viewers’ eyes to the flaws and threats of phone and social media misuse. Team JKI commenced their performance with a montage of people communicating through various means: tin can telephone, rotary dial telephone, phone booth, cordless telephone, and cellphone. Voiceovers by Jhong, Kim, and Ion in their local dialects previewed the upcoming performance, summarizing its essence, followed by a visually striking wave of phones moving in unison. The narrative unfolds with Jhong ordering food for his children in a restaurant, where he witnesses a fight. The skit then "rewinds" to the night before the restaurant visit, where Jhong urges everyone to turn off their phones, leading to a disagreement with his wife, portrayed by Lea Carla "Luningning" Santos. An interpretative dance by the couple ensues, with each movement and breath painting the heartbreaking reality of how too much phone usage desensitizes human relationships. Back in the restaurant setting, Kim, playing a social media influencer, enters the scene holding her phone to talk to her followers. Interrupted by the fight, Kim recorded the incident with her phone. Marked by another rewind transition, she breaks into a theatrical dance, depicting a food vlog. Her mother, played by actress Janice de Belen, enters the scene and asks for money for her makeover. Kim is noticeably exhausted and disgruntled, seemingly struggling to set clear boundaries with her mom who keeps asking for money. “Hi, guys, it’s me your favorite girl,” she puts on a bubbly mask for her followers. The story fast-forwards to Ion as a server in the restaurant, who accidentally bumps into a customer,played by actor Bernard Palanca. Unfortunately, the customer is quick to show anger and provoke Ion. With the incident caught on camera by Kim, Ion receives a call from his sibling informing him that he's gone viral and is being cancelled on social media. Various celebrities including Martin Nievera, John "Sweet" Lapus, Jennica Garcia, and Jameson Blake, made virtual cameo appearances playing netizens reacting to the restaurant squabble. Ion depicts his frustration through dance, the choreography expressing how the intense online hate and judgment is taking a toll on his sanity. The trio reunites on stage, elevating the thrill of their whole performance with a death-defying parkour exhibition. They take their dance routine on a makeshift giant pachinko board where they're seen theatrically climbing, swinging, and dancing without harnesses. As they showcase their breathtaking wall climbing act, their voice-over plays in the background, with each of them saying their piece about how mobile technology affected them as individuals. Collectively, the team then presented an impactful question "Ikaw, gaano ka ka-responsable sa paggamit ng cellphone?" . From thrilling, the production to heartwarming as Jhong, Kim, and Ion pretend to be talking to their loved ones over the phone, expressing heartfelt messages to them. Jhong, Kim and Ion ended their performance with a simple yet impactful gesture of raising their lit-up mobile phones while surrounded by total darkness. Grand ChampionAverage Score: 9.6 Video 

 Magpasikat 2024 
The fifteenth edition of Magpasikat, subtitled "KinsEYYY", was held from October 21 to 26, 2024. The competing teams were revealed on Monday, August 19. Five teams competed with each other: Team Vice-Karylle-Ryan (or Team ViRyLle), Team Ogie-Kim-MC-Lassy, Team Vhong-Ion-Darren-Amy (or Team VIDA), Team Anne-Jugs-Teddy (or Team AJT), and Team Jhong-Jackie-Cianne (or Team JJC). This edition marked Darren Espanto's debut on the competition after joining the show as a regular host in March 2024. However he has appeared as guest performer for Team Vice-Ryan-Jackie in the 2021 edition, and has been one of the hurados in the 2022 edition. This year's competition also marked the return of Magpasikat week being held in October after the past three editions were held in November; and was also the first Magpasikat to air on both ALLTV and GMA. This year's judges were television and film director Rory Quintos, actress and beauty queen Alice Dixson, actor Donny Pangilinan, actress Gabbi Garcia, and former ABS-CBN president and Pilipinas Got Talent judge Freddie M. Garcia.

The grand prize for this year's competition is  for the champions' chosen beneficiary, while the prize for the second and third-placing groups are  and , respectively. At the end of the week, Team Ogie-Kim-MC-Lassy emerged as winners. The team's victory marked Kim Chiu's fourth win overall, tying Jhong Hilario for the third most Magpasikat wins, and the first win for Ogie Alcasid and the comedy duo of MC "Muah" Calaquian and Lassy Marquez. Meanwhile, Team Jhong-Jackie-Cianne and Team Anne-Jugs-Teddy were declared as second and third placers, respectively. For the first time, the teams Vice-Karylle-Ryan and Vhong-Ion-Darren-Amy placing 4th and 5th placers respectively were not received any amount of prizes unlike last year's  each.

 List of Magpasikat 2024 performances and results Group Performance description Result Watch     4th PlaceAverage Score: 7.6 Video     Grand ChampionAverage Score: 9.2 Video     5th PlaceAverage Score: 7.3 Video     3rd PlaceAverage Score: 8.3 Video    2nd PlaceAverage Score: 8.9 Video 