The Flash is an upcoming American superhero film based on the DC Comics character Flash. It is intended to be the twelfth film in the DC Extended Universe (DCEU). The film will be directed by Andy Muschietti from a screenplay written by Christina Hodson. It will star Ezra Miller as Barry Allen / The Flash, with Ben Affleck and Michael Keaton in supporting roles. It is the fourth live-action theatrical film featuring the character, following Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), Suicide Squad (2016) and Justice League (2017), and will be the first full-length feature film centered around the character. In The Flash, Allen traverses back in time to prevent his mother's murder and deals with the consequences of it.

Development on a film for the Flash began in the late 1980s, with a modern interpretation beginning in 2004. Multiple directors and writers became attached to the project from then through 2014, by when it was being developed for the DCEU, with Miller cast in the title role. Seth Grahame-Smith and Rick Famuyiwa were attached to direct at different points between 2015 and 2016 before dropping out, with the duo John Francis Daley and Jonathan Goldstein developing the film from 2018 until their departure in March 2019; each left over creative differences. That July, Muschietti joined to direct with Hodson writing the script, which was intended to draw elements from the Flashpoint storyline. Multiple actors were initially set to appear in the film, with casting under Muschietti's direction beginning in July 2020. Filming is expected to begin in April 2021 in London.

The Flash is scheduled to be released in the United States on November 4, 2022.

 Premise 
Barry Allen attempts to go back in time to prevent his mother's murder which brings unintentional consequences to his timeline.

 Cast 
 Ezra Miller as Barry Allen / The Flash:A police forensic investigator from Central City and member of the Justice League who can move at superhuman speeds and vibrate at a molecular level, through his abilities to access the Speed Force. Miller described his portrayal of the character as "an exploration of a multi-dimensional human being" while exploring the character's consideration as a superhero and a person to "feel the humanity of someone who is heroic — or the heroism of someone who is a flawed, deeply human person."

 Ben Affleck as Bruce Wayne / Batman:A wealthy socialite from Gotham City, benefactor of the Justice League and owner of Wayne Enterprises, who became the vigilante known as Batman following his parents' murder. On how Affleck's Wayne played into the story, director Andy Muschietti stated "He's a very substantial part of the emotional impact of the movie. The interaction and relationship between Barry and Affleck's Wayne will bring an emotional level that we haven't seen before," He added. "It's Barry's movie, it's Barry's story, but their characters are more related than we think. They both lost their mothers to murder, and that's one of the emotional vessels of the movie. That's where the Affleck Batman kicks in."
 Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman: An older version of Wayne from an alternative reality. Keaton reprises his role for the first time in 30 years, having previously played the character in Batman (1989) and Batman Returns (1992).

 Production 
 Background 
Warner Bros. hired comic book writer Jeph Loeb to write a screenplay for the Flash in the late 1980s, but the outing never materialized. Development for a film adaptation was revived after the studio was impressed with David S. Goyer's script for Batman Begins (2005), and he was offered his choice of a Flash or Green Lantern film adaptation. In December 2004, it was announced that Goyer would be writing, producing and directing The Flash. He approached actor Ryan Reynolds for the role of Barry Allen after previously working together on Blade: Trinity (2004), with the intention of also using Wally West as a supporting character. Goyer's script, which he tonally compared to Sam Raimi's work on the Spider-Man trilogy, was influenced by seminal comic book runs by Mike Baron, Mark Waid, and Geoff Johns. By 2007, however, Goyer dropped out of the project, citing creative differences with the studio.

With the financial success of Night at the Museum (2006), Warner Bros. hired Shawn Levy to direct The Flash in February 2007. Levy would oversee the writing of a new draft, using elements of Goyer's script. Levy instead went to work on Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian (2009), and was replaced by David Dobkin in October 2007. Dobkin developed The Flash as a spin-off of Justice League Mortal, focusing on the Wally West character. Craig Wright was hired to write the script the next month, and, after the collapse of Justice League Mortal, Warner Bros. placed The Flash for a 2008 release date. The project became delayed by the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike. Warner Bros. then hired Charles Roven to produce The Flash, with comic book writer Geoff Johns serving as a consult and co-writer. Johns created a new film treatment, which was screenwriten by Dan Mazeau. In an October 2009 interview, Roven stated that Warner Bros. was not confident enough in their take to greenlight the film. Mazeau disputed Roven's statement and said that the film was moving forward as planned.

In June 2010, Green Lantern (2011) writers Greg Berlanti, Michael Green and Marc Guggenheim were hired to pen a treatment for the film. The script was based on a recent comics run by Geoff Johns and used the Barry Allen incarnation of the character. In July 2013, The Hollywood Reporter reported that the film was tentatively planned to be released in 2016. 

 Development 
In October 2014, Warner Bros. announced The Flash would be released on March 23, 2018, as the sixth installment of the DC Extended Universe (DCEU), with Ezra Miller cast as Barry Allen. By April 2015, Phil Lord and Christopher Miller were writing a story treatment for the film. In October 2015, Seth Grahame-Smith was in negotiations to direct and write the script, based off the treatment by Lord and Miller. He departed the project due to creative differences in April 2016, however, Warner Bros. retained his script.

By June 2016, Warner Bros. hired Rick Famuyiwa to take over the directing duties. In September 2016, Famuyiwa revealed that he had finished a revision of the script, and teased the possibility of Ray Fisher's Cyborg appearing. A month later, he left the project, citing creative differences with the studio. In January 2017, Joby Harold was hired to do a page-one rewrite of the script. By that May, Robert Zemeckis and Matthew Vaughn were shortlisted for the director's job, while Sam Raimi and Marc Webb turned down offers. At the San Diego Comic-Con in July, it was announced that the film was retitled Flashpoint, based on the comic book of the same title. During this time, Dan Mazeau contributed to the script. In September, Geoff Johns said the story of Thomas Wayne's Batman would be a key element in the plot; Jeffrey Dean Morgan expressed interest in reprising the role of Wayne from Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016). In January 2018, the filmmaking duo John Francis Daley and Jonathan Goldstein entered negotiations to write and direct. The studio had discussions with Ben Affleck to act as director, after Zemeckis could not free up his schedule, but Affleck passed on the opportunity. Daley and Goldstein were confirmed as directors in March 2018. By April 2018, the Flashpoint concept had been dropped.

In March 2019, following creative differences with Daley and Goldstein's script, Miller teamed with Grant Morrison to write a new screenplay. By that July, Daley and Goldstein had left the project; Andy Muschietti and Christina Hodson entered negotiations to direct and write a new draft of the script, respectively. Barbara Muschietti additionally joined Michael Disco as the film's producers. In November 2019, filming was expected to begin in 2021. In January 2020, Andy Muschietti said the film would include elements from the Flashpoint comic book storyline, and that June, filming was set to start in the beginning of the following year. By that September, Barbara Muschietti stated during the virtual DC FanDome event that the film would feature many characters from the DC Universe with the Flash serving as "the bridge between all of these characters and timelines" that are featured in it, which would be used to restart the continuity of the DCEU without disregarding what came prior.

 Casting 
On October 15, 2014, it was announced that Ezra Miller would play the title role in the Flash solo film and in Justice League. In July 2016, Variety reported that Kiersey Clemons was Famuyiwa's top choice for the film's female lead role, while The Hollywood Reporters Borys Kit revealed that Rita Ora and Lucy Boynton were also among the list of top-runner actresses. Clemons was eventually confirmed to star as the female lead, Iris West. In August, Ray Fisher was confirmed to appear as Victor Stone / Cyborg in the film. In September, Billy Crudup was in negotiations to portray Barry's father Henry Allen in the film. In September 2017, Deadline Hollywood reported that Gal Gadot will reprise her role as Diana Prince / Wonder Woman.

In June 2020, Michael Keaton was in early talks to reprise his role as Bruce Wayne / Batman from Tim Burton's Batman (1989) and Batman Returns (1992) as an alternate universe version of Batman for the film, and the following month, Fisher had been approached to reprise his role in the film along with the actors for other members of the Justice League, in a cameo appearance. In August, Keaton was confirmed to appear, with Ben Affleck also reprising his version of Bruce Wayne / Batman from the DCEU. In October, Crudup entered early negotiations to re-join the project under a new deal with Warner Bros. after he had left the production due to the shifts in the writers and directors, while the involvement of Clemons was uncertain.

 Filming 
Principal photography is expected to begin in April 2021, in London at Leavesden Studios .

 Release 
The Flash is scheduled to be released by Warner Bros. Pictures in the United States on November 4, 2022. It was originally scheduled for release on March 23, 2018, but was later advanced to March 16, 2018, until that release was given to Tomb Raider (2018). The film was put on hold after the departure of Famuyiwa with an estimated release in 2021, and was slated for release on July 1, 2022 after the hiring of Muschietti. It was then moved up to June 3, 2022, before it was delayed to the November 2022 date after Warner Bros. shifted its schedule due to the COVID-19 pandemic.