The Flash is an upcoming American superhero film based on the DC Comics character Flash. It is intended to be the fourteenth installment in the DC Extended Universe (DCEU). The film will be directed by Andy Muschietti, with a screenplay by Christina Hodson. It stars Ezra Miller as the titular character, with Kiersey Clemons and Billy Crudup as supporting characters. It is the fourth live-action theatrical film featuring the character, following Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), Suicide Squad (2016) and Justice League (2017), and will be the first full-length feature film centered around the character.

The Flash is scheduled to be released on July 1, 2022.

Cast
 Ezra Miller as Barry Allen / The Flash:
A Central City police forensic investigator who can move at superhuman speeds and vibrate at a molecular level, through his abilities to access the Speed Force. On how his portrayal of The Flash would differ from that of Grant Gustin's in The CW's TV series, Miller explained, "Well, [first] it's going to be a movie [...] I'd like for it to be an exploration of a human being, a multi-dimensional human being, to speak." He added, "I'd like the character to have many dimensions. But really, I’d like him to have the usual dimensions we know and love, and then some extra ones that are part of the amazing consideration of this superhero. I hope to realize him as a person, and I think what's most exciting for me in superhero mythologies is when we feel the humanity of someone who is heroic — or the heroism of someone who is a flawed, deeply human person."

 Kiersey Clemons as Iris West:
A journalist for the Picture News and love interest of Barry Allen. This version of Iris, who is Caucasian in the comics, is portrayed as African-American due to Clemons' ethnicity.
 Billy Crudup as Henry Allen:
Barry's father, who was blamed for the murder of his wife.

Production
Development
Warner Bros. hired comic book writer Jeph Loeb to write a screenplay in the late 1980s, but the outing never materialized. Development for a film adaptation was revived after the studio was impressed with David S. Goyer's script for Batman Begins, and he was offered his choosing of a Flash or Green Lantern film adaptation. In December 2004, it was announced that David S. Goyer would be writing, producing and directing The Flash. He approached his Blade: Trinity co-star Ryan Reynolds for the Barry Allen role, with the intention of also using Wally West as a supporting character. Goyer's script, which he tonally compared to Sam Raimi's work on the Spider-Man trilogy, was influenced by seminal comic book runs by Mike Baron, Mark Waid, and Geoff Johns. By 2007, however, Goyer dropped out of the project, citing creative difference with the studio.

With the financial success of Night at the Museum, Warner Bros. hired Shawn Levy to direct The Flash in February 2007. Levy would oversee the writing of a new draft, using elements of Goyer's script. Levy instead went to work on Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian, and was replaced by David Dobkin in October 2007. Dobkin developed The Flash as a spin-off of Justice League: Mortal, focusing on the Wally West character. Craig Wright was hired to write the script, and, after the collapse of Justice League Mortal, Warner Bros. placed The Flash for a 2008 release date. The project became delayed by the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike. Warner Bros. then hired Charles Roven to produce The Flash, with comic book writer Geoff Johns serving as a consult and co-writer. Johns created a new film treatment, which was screenwriten by Dan Mazeau. In an October 2009 interview, Roven stated that Warner Bros. were not confident enough in their take to greenlight the film. Mazeau disputed Roven's statement, and said that the film was moving forward as planned.

In June 2010, Green Lantern writers Greg Berlanti, Michael Green and Marc Guggenheim were hired to pen a treatment for the film. The script was based on a recent comics run by Geoff Johns, and used the Barry Allen incarnation of the character. In July 2013, The Hollywood Reporter reported that the film was tentatively planned to be released in 2016. In October 2014, Warner Bros. announced The Flash would be released on March 23, 2018, as the sixth installment of the DC Extended Universe. By April 2015, Phil Lord and Christopher Miller were writing a story treatment for the film. In October 2015, Seth Grahame-Smith was in negotiations to direct and write the script, based off the treatment by Lord and Miller. He departed the project due to creative differences in April 2016, however, Warner Bros. retained his script.

By June 2016, Warner Bros. hired Rick Famuyiwa to take over the directing duties. In September 2016, Famuyiwa revealed that he had finished a revision of the script, and teased the possibility of Cyborg appearing. A month later, he left the project, citing creative differences with the studio. In January 2017, Joby Harold was hired to do a page-one rewrite of the script. By May, Robert Zemeckis and Matthew Vaughn were shortlisted for the director's job. Sam Raimi and Marc Webb turned down offers. At the San Diego Comic-Con in July, it was announced that the film was retitled Flashpoint, based on the comic book story arc. During this time, Dan Mazeau contributed to the script. In September, Geoff Johns said the story of Thomas Wayne's Batman would be a key element in the plot; Jeffrey Dean Morgan expressed interest in reprising the role from Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice. In January 2018, the filmmaking duo John Francis Daley and Jonathan Goldstein entered negotiations to write and direct. The studio had discussions with Ben Affleck to act as director, after Zemeckis could not free up his schedule, but Affleck passed on the opportunity. Daley and Goldstein were confirmed as directors in March 2018. By April 2018, the Flashpoint concept had been dropped.

In March 2019, following creative differences with Daley and Goldstein's script, star Miller teamed with Grant Morrison to write a new screenplay. By July 2019, Daley and Goldstein had left the project; Andy Muschietti and Christina Hodson entered negotiations to direct and write a new draft of the script, respectively. Barbara Muschietti additionally joined Michael Disco as the film's producers.

Casting
On October 15, 2014, it was announced that Ezra Miller would play the title role in the film and in both upcoming Justice League films. In July 2016, Variety reported that Kiersey Clemons was Famuyiwa's top choice for the female lead role in the film, while The Hollywood Reporters Borys Kit revealed that Rita Ora and Lucy Boynton were also among the list of top-runner actresses. Clemons was eventually confirmed to star as the female lead, Iris West. In August, Ray Fisher was confirmed to appear as Victor Stone / Cyborg in the film. In September, Billy Crudup was in negotiations to portray Barry Allen's father in the film. In September 2017, Deadline reported that Gal Gadot will reprise her role as Diana Prince / Wonder Woman.

Filming
Principal photography is expected to begin in 2021.

Release
The Flash is scheduled to be released on July 1, 2022. The film was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on March 23, 2018. It was later advanced to March 16, 2018, which was eventually given to Tomb Raider. The project was put on hold after the departure of Famuyiwa.