YBNL (abbreviation for Yahoo Boy No Laptop) is the second studio album by Nigerian hip hop recording artist Olamide. It was released on November 12, 2012, as the follow-up to his debut studio album Rapsodi (2011). The album features guest appearances from Kay Switch, Tiwa Savage, Dammy Krane, Davido, Kidakudz, Reminisce, Base 1, Buckwyla and Minus 2. Olamide enlisted Pheelz, Samklef, I.D Cabasa, 2Kriss and Tyrone to produce the album. YBNL was supported by four singles: "Ilefo Illuminati", "First of All", "Stupid Love" and "Voice of the Street".

Background
Olamide promoted the album by holding a launch party at Octopus Club in Yaba, Lagos. The launch party featured performances from Dammy Krane, Morell, Djzeez, Phyno, Phenom, Samklef, Skales and Lace. Prior to the album's launch party in Yaba, Olamide held a concert at Mazabs Event Centre in Ilorin, Kwara State on March 21, 2013.

Composition
The YBNL phrase is, in itself, a paradox. In layman's terms, Olamide wants to be fly like a Yahoo Boy, but doesn't want to be associated with sending scam emails. The lyrics of YBNL focus primarily on his love for God and the streets that raised him. In "Jesu O’ Kola", he looks to God for support because he believes the music industry castigated him. In the Church-like track "Jale", Olamide thanked God for preventing him from stealing. In "Voice of the Streets", he raps about his ambition and determination to blow; he also raps about the passion and energy that young hustlers like himself possess. In "Street Love", he reminisces about his humble upbringing in Bariga. In "Money", Olamide talks about his constant quest for paper chasing. In "Fucking with the Devil", he said he's not "born again", but can hear angels calling.

Singles
On  November 20, 2011, Olamide released the 2Kriss-produced album's lead single "Ilefo Illuminati". The music video for the song was released on June 23, 2012; it was shot and directed in South Africa by Godfather Productions. On June 21, 2012, the album's second single "First of All" was released. It was produced by Pheelz. The music video for the song, taped at a total length of 4 minutes and 11 seconds, was directed in Nigeria by Patrick Ellis. The remix of "First of All" features vocals from D'banj and appeared on the compilation album, D'Kings Men (2013). On July 27, 2012, YBNL Nation released the album's third single "Stupid Love". The song was produced by Samklef. Its music video was directed by Matt Max. On  November 1, 2012, the album's fourth single "Voice of the Street" was released. The music video for the song was also directed by Matt Max.

Critical reception

YBNL received generally positive reviews from music critics. Tayo Ayomide of Nigerian Entertainment Today gave the album 3.5 stars out of 5, adding, "YBNL is the proud work of a rapper who has emerged from the shadows of a hit making producer and a late Nigerian rap legend to stand in the spotlight and boldly show us what Nigerian rap has been missing for a while–the heartbeat of the streets."  A writer for TayoTV awarded the album 8 stars out of 10, stating, "Olamide really did his homework on this album, most of the beats were on point, his features were great and his delivery and rhymes were solid." A writer for Hi-Life Magazine assigned a rating of 7 stars out 10, stating, "With the success of tracks like "First of All" and "Stupid Love", this young artist who grew up from 9ice’s neck of woods – Bariga, Lagos is here to stay."

Accolades
YBNL won Best Rap Album and Album of the Year at the 2013 edition of The Headies.  
Year Awards ceremony Award description(s) Results2013The HeadiesBest Rap AlbumAlbum of the Year

Track listing
From Jaguda.

Personnel

Olamide Adedeji – primary artist
Tiwatope Savage Balogun – featured artist
Dammy Krane – featured artist 
David Adeleke – featured artist 
Kidakudz – featured artist 
Reminisce – featured artist 
Base 1 – featured artist 
Fulado – featured artist 
Buckwyla – featured artist 
Starkash – featured artist 
Minus 2 – featured artist 
Pheelz – producer
Samklef – producer
I.D Cbasa – producer 
2Kriss – producer 
Tyrone – producer

Release history
 Region/Digital Platform  Date  Format  Label Nigeria  November 12, 2012  CD, Digital download YBNL Nation iTunes  June 21, 2013  Digital download 