YBNL (an acronym for Yahoo Boy No Laptop) is the second studio album by Nigerian musician Olamide. It was released by YBNL Nation on November 12, 2012. A follow-up to his debut studio album, Rapsodi (2011), YBNL features from Kayswitch, Tiwa Savage, Dammy Krane, Davido, Kida Kudz, and Reminisce and Base One, among others. Its production was handled by Pheelz, Samklef, I.D Cabasa, 2Kriss and Tyrone. YBNL was supported by the singles "Ilefo Illuminati", "First of All", "Stupid Love" and "Voice of the Street".

Background
The album's launch party was held at Octopus Club in Yaba, Lagos; it featured additional performances from Dammy Krane, Morell, Djzeez, Phyno, Phenom, Samklef, Skales and Lace. Prior to the launch party, Olamide held a concert at Mazabs Event Centre in Ilorin on March 21, 2013.

Composition
The YBNL phrase is, in itself, a paradox. Olamide wants to be fly like a "Yahoo Boy" but doesn't want to be associated with sending scam emails. The album's lyrics focus primarily on his love for God and the streets that raised him. In "Jesu O’ Kola", he looks to God for support because he believes the music industry castigated him. In the Church-inspired track "Jale", Olamide thanked God for preventing him from stealing. In "Voice of the Streets", he raps about his ambition to blow and about the passion and energy that young hustlers like himself possess. In "Street Love", he is reminiscent of his humble upbringing in Bariga. In "Money", Olamide talks about his constant quest for paper chasing. In "Fucking with the Devil", he said he's not born again but can hear angels calling.

Singles
The 2Kriss-produced track "Ilefo Illuminati" was released on November 20, 2011, as the album's lead single. Its music video was filmed in South Africa by Godfather Productions and released on June 23, 2012. The Pheelz-produced track "First of All" was released on June 21, 2012, as the album's second single. The accompanying music video for the song was shot and directed in Nigeria by Patrick Ellis. The remix of "First of All" features vocals by D'banj and appeared on the 2013 compilation album, D'Kings Men. The Samklef-produced track "Stupid Love" was released on July 27, 2012, as the album's third single. The song's music video was directed by Matt Max. The album's fourth single, "Voice of the Street", was released on November 1, 2012. Its accompanying music video was also directed by Matt Max.

Critical reception

YBNL received generally positive reviews from music critics. Tayo Ayomide of Nigerian Entertainment Today awarded the album 3.5 stars out of 5, applauding Olamide for "emerging from the shadows of a hit-making producer and a late Nigerian rap legend to stand in the spotlight and boldly show us what Nigerian rap has been missing for a while–the heartbeat of the streets." A writer for TayoTV rated the album 8 out of 10, praising its rhymes and Olamide's delivery. Hi-Life Magazine assigned a rating of 7 out 10, commending the tracks "First of All" and "Stupid Love".

Accolades
YBNL won Best Rap Album and Album of the Year at The Headies 2013.

Track listing

Personnel

Olamide Adedeji – primary artist
Tiwatope Savage-Balogun – featured artist
Oyindamola Emmanuel – featured artist 
David Adeleke – featured artist 
Olukayode Odesanya – featured artist 
Remilekun Safaru – featured artist 
Isaac "Base One" Sotunde – featured artist  
Emmanuel "Buckwyla" Woko – featured artist 
Minus 2 – featured artist 
Phillip "Pheelz" Moses – producer
Samuel "Samklef" Oguachuba – producer
Olumide "I.D Cabasa" Ogunade – producer 
Raphael Christopher and Moses Christoper – producer 
Triumph "Tyrone" Grandeur – producer

Release history
 Region  Date  Format  Label Nigeria  November 12, 2012  CD, Digital download YBNL Nation Various  June 21, 2013  Digital download 