The Hank Aaron State Trail is a  rail trail in Milwaukee County, Wisconsin.

The trail is named for former Milwaukee Braves and Milwaukee Brewers right fielder Hank Aaron, and was built on a former roadbed of the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railway.

History
Following a recommendation by then-mayor John Norquist's Bicycle Task Force to develop an east-west trail through the Menomonee Valley, the trail opened in 2000 with a length of only a third of a mile, near American Family Field, though a segment between 13th Street and 25th Street was added shortly after. In August 2006, the trail stretched from Lakeshore State Park in the east to American Family Field in the west. In 2010, a four-mile westward extension to 94th Place was completed, setting the total trail length to ten miles. In November 2011, the trail was expanded from 94th Place to Underwood Parkway, though this section was composed of compacted gravel. In 2012, a one-mile spur connecting to Mitchell Park Horticultural Conservatory was added. In 2014, a ramp and stairway were added to the trail near 6th Street to allow easy access to street level. In 2018, the compacted gravel section of the trail west of 94th Place was paved with the completion of the reconstruction of the Zoo Interchange.

In 2020, the trail was designated part of U.S. Bicycle Route 30.

Route
The trail begins on the shore of Lake Michigan in Lakeshore State Park (). The trail travels west through Milwaukee, passing by the Harley-Davidson Museum, Potawatomi Hotel & Casino, American Family Field, and the Wisconsin State Fair Park. The trail ends at the Oak Leaf Trail in Wauwatosa, Wisconsin ().

Access
The trail is open to walkers, joggers, bicyclists, and in-line skaters. Much of the trail is accessible to people with disabilities.

+ Hank Aaron State Trail access points City  Street  Direction  Notes Milwaukee  Milwaukee Street  North and east  Near Lakeshore State ParkConnects to Oak Leaf Trail Milwaukee River Line and Lake LineEastern terminus of trail Erie Street  East and south  Near Henry Maier Festival Park Water Street  East and south  Connects to Kinnickinnic River Trail 2nd Street  North, east, and south  Eastward end of off-street portionConnects to Oak Leaf Trail Kinnickinnic Line 6th Street  North and south  Near Harley-Davidson Museum Emmber Lane  North and south  Near Potawatomi Hotel & Casino 25th Street  North 32nd Street  North 37th Street  South  Near Mitchell Park Horticultural Conservatory 44th Street  North and south  Near American Family Field Mitchell Boulevard  North and south West Allis  56th Street  South 60th Street  North and south Milwaukee  68th Street  North 76th Street  North and south  Near Wisconsin State Fair Park 84th Street  North and south  Connects to Oak Leaf Trail Kinnickinnic Line 89th Street  South 94th Place  South West Allis  108th Street  North and south  Near Milwaukee County ZooConnects to Wisconsin Highway 100 116th Street  West and south Wauwatosa  121st Street  North and south Underwood Parkway  North and south  Connects to Oak Leaf Trail Root River LineWestern terminus of trail