The following is a list of notable events and developments that are related to Philippine sports in 2020.

Events

Athletics

Basketball

3x3

Amateur

 March 9 – The DENR Warriors claimed the first championship title of the UNTV Cup Season 8 after they won against the AFP Cavaliers in the Game 2 of the Finals series at Smart Araneta Coliseum, Quezon City. ₱4 million cash prize for their chosen beneficiary.

Professional

 January 17 – The Barangay Ginebra San Miguel were crowned as the 2019 PBA Governors' Cup champions after clinching a 105–93 against the Meralco Bolts in a Game 5 for the 12th straight title at the Mall of Asia Arena.

 March 8 — The opening of the 45th season of PBA was held at the Smart Araneta Coliseum.

Collegiate

High school

Exhibition

National team

Women's basketball

Boxing

Collegiate sports
 December 11 – The University Athletic Association of the Philippines announced the cancellation of its 83rd season due to COVID-19 pandemic in the Philippines.

Cheerdance, streetdance, and dancesport

Diving

Football

Gymnastics

Mixed martial arts

Multi-sporting events

Volleyball

 February 29, Volleyball – The opening of the 8th season of PSL was held at the Filoil Flying V Centre.

Beach volleyball

Weightlifting
 January 28 – Hidilyn Diaz wins 3 gold medals in the 2020 Weightlifting World Cup in Rome, Italy.

Other events
 March 8 - After one year of broadcasts, 5 Plus rebrands as One Sports. In addition of transferring the name from cable to free-to-air, its cable and satellite counterpart has been also rebranded to One Sports+.

 March 12 
 The major sports leagues across the country announce a temporary suspension of play in an attempt to slow the spread of the coronavirus. the Philippine Basketball Association, the PBA Developmental League, and the Philippine Super Liga announces an indefinite suspension of league activity, while the Maharlika Pilipinas Basketball League and the National Basketball League announced that will suspend the remainder of the playoffs. In addition, the National Collegiate Athletic Association and the University Athletic Association of the Philippines games are canceled. The suspension of the four leagues adds a large schedule void for 5, One Sports, One Sports+, PBA Rush, S+A, Liga and Solar Sports.
 The major sports leagues across the country announce a temporary suspension or termination of play in an attempt to slow the spread of the coronavirus.

 March 30 — One Sports temporary suspends broadcast due to limitations brought about by the Enhanced Community Quarantine in Luzon, with 5 taking over some of its archived programming.

Other sports

100px|right|Eumir Marcial
 January 31, Tennis – Alexandra Eala has made history with her maiden juniors Grand Slam title with Indonesian partner Priska Nugroho in the 2020 Australian Open juniors doubles tournament in Melbourne Park.

 February 11 – 16 – Badminton: The Philippines to Host the 2020 Badminton Asia Team Championships at the Rizal Memorial Coliseum in Manila

 March 8 – Boxing – Eumir Marcial has clinched a spot in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics by beating Byamba-Erdene Otgonbaatar of Mongolia in the Asia/Oceania qualifying tournament in Amman, Jordan.

 March 11, Boxing – Irish Magno has clinched a spot in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics by beating Sumaiva Oosimova of Tajikistan in the Asia and Oceania Olympic Qualifying Tournament in Amman, Jordan.

Predicted and Scheduled Events

 April — 3x3: The Inaugural season of the PBA 3x3 League was officially opened.

 Mid-May — Football: The opening of the 4th season of Philippines Football League was held at the Rizal Memorial Stadium.

 August – Football: The Philippines host the 2020 AFF Women's Championship 

 October 3 — 9 – Multi sport Event: The Philippines will hosting the 10th ASEAN Para Games Most of the games' events will be hosted in Central Luzon

 November 7 – November 17 – Swimming: The Philippines to Host the 2020 Asian Swimming Championships at the New Clark City Aquatics Center in New Clark City, Capas, Tarlac

 TBD – Multi-sport Event: – The Marikina City was hosted the 2020 Palarong Pambansa.

Awards

 March 6 – 2020 PSA Annual Awards

Sports television specials

Deaths
100px|Arianne Caoili

January

 January 9 — Iñaki Vicente (b. 1955), football player.

March

 March 25 – Aric del Rosario (b. 1940), former basketball coach, UST Growling Tigers Men's Basketball

 March 30 – Arianne Caoili (b. 1986), Filipina chess player