Daon (pronounced 'day-on') is a biometrics and identity assurance software company founded in 2000 by Irish entrepreneur Dermot Desmond. According to the company, the word Daon stems from an "Old Irish word for human". Daon has its US headquarters in Fairfax, Virginia. It also has operations in the International Financial Services Center (IFSC) in Dublin, Ireland. The company has regional and sales offices in Serbia and Australia.

 History 
Founded in 2000, the company was originally based in Dublin, Ireland.

As of 2006, the company's board included former United States Secretary of Homeland Security, Tom Ridge. In 2006, Daon and the American Association of Airport Executives (AAAE) entered into a joint venture to create the Security Biometric Clearing Network (SBCN) to provide services for biometric identity management, including enrollment, background checking, secure biometric and biographic information storage, and card issuance.

In August 2008, Daon acquired software assets and associated staff for physical security interconnectivity from Enterprise Air, a New York-based provider of solutions for the physical security market.

As of 2015, Daon's customers included Atom Bank in the UK. In 2017, Daon launched the IdentityX for use by Visa, Mastercard, USAA, and BNP Paribas for security in digital banking. In July 2019, Daon announced the update of its IdentityX Digital Onboarding 2.0.

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and need to verify vaccination information prior to travel, Daon launched the VeriFLY app. In 2022, the app was used by Carnival Cruise Lines and American Airlines to digitally process passenger health information and complete the vaccination verification process.

Daon, which is reported to be majority owned by a company in the Cayman Islands, declared after-tax profits of approximately €220,000 in 2023.

 Products 
Daon's products include IdentityX (a biometric mobile authentication platform), DaonEngine, DaonEnroll, DaonAnalytics, and Credential Connect. Daon serves multiple markets including mobile authentication, border management, civil ID, traveler ID, employee credentialing, and access control. Their software is used at various airports and international borders and supports U.S. Registered Traveler airports.

The company's IdentityX product platform was designed to authenticate users on a mobile device using biometrics instead of a password. IdentityX uses several methods, including facial recognition, voice recognition and fingerprint, to prove a user is who they claim to be. As of 2015, IdentityX was one of several products certified by the FIDO Alliance. Also in 2015, Daon's IdentityX won NACUSO's "Next Big Idea" competition and a "Best in Show" award from the CUNA Technology Council.