Picollator is an Internet search engine that performs searches for web sites and multimedia by visual query (image) or text, or a combination of visual query and text. Picollator recognizes objects in the image, obtains their relevance to the text and vice versa, and searches in accordance with all information provided.

 Description 

At present, Picollator identifies human faces in the images and creates a database of people's faces. This allows the user to search for other images of the submitted person, lookalikes and/or similar images in images found on websites. Picollator can be used in any language.

 History 

2006 - Recogmission LLC developed a desktop application for photo collections management. The system automatically classifies, manages and retrieves photographs stored locally or in corporate databases.

2007 - Recogmission started Picollator multimedia search engine project, now in Beta stage.

2008 - Picollator.mobi  is launched — a new universal search engine for mobile phones.

2009 - Recogmission opens the web based content filter service piFilter.com , which inherited some pattern recognition technologies from Picollator.

 Features 

Most image search engines match user textual query and picture tags. Picollator is based on a different approach. Patterns and objects found in the image are stored in its database, therefor it is able to understand the contents of the image and compare it to other images to find similarities.

To search for multimedia information, the user may submit

Sample image to find images with relevant people
Image to find web resources
Text to find images
Text to find web resources
Text and Image to find images and/or web resources.

 Trivia 

Picollator is a noun, while the corresponding verb 'to picollate' has been first invented by Recogmission team. 'Picollate' consists of two words sampled: 'PICture' and 'COLLATE'. Recogmission used the word 'picollate' in the meaning of the process of picture searching and managing.

Picollator generally works with digital photos and texts and offers the hybrid search possibility. Yet, the system is able to process artworks and even painted portraits.

Picollator image index contains black-and-white as well as coloured images.

 Company 

:ru:Recogmission LLC has developed a novel indexing engine for multimedia information search based on the visual query.

Recogmission develops solutions for multimedia information (image, text and video) indexing and searching on the web and in corporate environments.