Daniel Garbade (born 1957 in Zurich) is a Swiss painter, illustrator, art director, property master and publisher. Born in Switzerland, from Swiss-Cuban origins, grandnephew of Adrien Lachenal and great grandchild of Cuban sculptor Fernando Heydrich.

Garbade lived in Spain from 1983 till 2011, when he took residence in his hometown Zurich, to work with Peyer Fine Art. Since 2016 he is back again in Spain, living in Mascaraque Castile- La Mancha.

 Work 
Garbade is one of Spanish expressionists, who turned to Pop art during the Movida madrileña. His stroke is personal and minimalistic. Writer Alvaro Pombo described his work, using for the first time the term "garbatear". His portraits are melancholic and humorous, they show men in its core; Nobel Prize winner José Saramago described it as follows: "Garbade shows us humanity where it unfolds" His portraits of Nancy Cunard[3], King Juan Carlos I, Rodriguez Zapatero, Kofi Annan and Pedro Almodovar are well-known. His image of the naked Pope Benedict XVI attracted attention in 2006 and was removed from his exhibition at the request of the Swiss government.

On behalf of the Dadaists of the Cabaret Voltaire Zurich, he designed the gravestone of Mikhail Bakunin at the Bremgarten cemetery, Berne.

In 1987 he took part in the publication of poems as co-founder of the Magazine Signos

 Film 
Since 1979, Garbade has worked as a production manager and later as Property master for advertising and feature films at Condor Films, Barney, Tardio & Melsky, Warner Bros, TF1 and The Ladd Company; Including films such as "Five days one summer" by Fred Zinnemann or "Espion leve toi" by Yves Boisset.

 Engagement 
An avid fighter for the rights of homosexuals, he worked for the American Foundation for AIDS Research (AmfAR) and the  in Madrid, where he illustrated texts in various writings such as in Orientaciones. In the exhibition and the book Cosas de casados , he published his drawings on the subject of homosexuality in Art together with David Hockney and Tom of Finland. In the books La loca adventura de vivir, La pequeña muerte and Reload, he treated the subject..

His wedding (2006) was the first same-sex marriage in Mascaraque, Castile- La Mancha, Spain

Garbade created the exhibition and the book Côctel about tolerance in the Convent of San Ildefonso (Toledo) joined by writers like Rafael Alberti, Vicente Molina Foix, José Saramago, , Jesús Ferrero and Leopoldo Alas. The exhibition was supported by the Vice-President of UNESCO and the Swiss Government.

Due to his Cuban background, he is grandson of Theodore Garbade and cousin of sculptor Juan Esnard Heydrich, Daniel Garbade acted also as photographer in interviews with Cuban Artists and writers, such as Severo Sarduy.(El Pais Semanal)

Garbade has been a source of inspiration for intercultural cooperation between Switzerland and Spain since 1983. He brought the first Swiss gallery to the ARCO Art fair in 1985, exhibiting artists like Pablo Runyan or Jorge Arxe. He co-operated with Werner Bischof and John Armleder at the Museo Reina Sofia, Circulo de Bellas Artes and other galleries in the Swiss weeks of Madrid in 1988. In 2012 he was invited to the exhibitions Hispano-Suizo in Zurich, and in 2014 to Hispano -Suizo Madrid. As curator, he conducted the exhibition Desayuno para Inmigrantes on the immigration of Swiss artists in Spain. In 1989, he helped François Lachenal for the exhibition: du Greco a Goya, a homage to the work of the Museo del Prado saved during the Spanish Civil War in Geneva. His grandfather Paul Lachenal was involved in the saveguard of the paintings as delegate of the International Committee.

 Galleries and collections 
 Museo de la Hermandad,Toledo, Spain
 Bienal del Tajo, Toledo, Spain
 Convento of San Ildefonso, Toledo,Spain
 Caja Rural, Retrospectiva,Toledo, Spain
 Gallery Quorum, Madrid, Spain
 , Madrid, Spain
 Gallery Dionis Bennassar, Madrid, Spain
 Peyer Fine Art, Zúrich, Switzerland
 Gallery Ziegler, Zúrich, Switzerland
 ART Basel, Prints, Galeria Barês, Paris, France
 Galería Barês, Paris, France
 Galeria Arthêmes, Burdeos, France
 Galería Knapp,Lausanne, Switzerland
 Tossan Tossan, Gallery, New York, USA
 Gallery Nathan, Zúrich, Switzerland
 Stephen Floersheimer, Orselina, Switzerland
 Gallery Kin, México
Gloria Kirby Colection, Tánger, Morocco
 Kunstszene Luzern, Switzerland
 Caja Rural, Toledo, Retrospectiva, Spain
 Biblioteca Nacional, Madrid, Spain
 Kunstsammlung des Bundes, BAK, Switzerland
 Musee de la ville de Geneve, Switzerland
Metro, Madrid, Spain
Ateneo de Madrid, Spain

 Books 
 Alvaro Pombo: Los oleos y dibujos de Garbade. Nicolás Edic., Toledo 1988, 
 Giusepe Ungaretti: Nueve poemas inéditos, Madrid 1990 
 Leopoldo Alas: Signos11/12. Editor Libertarias, Madrid 1991, 
 Daniel Garbade:Encres de chine autor du Fake-book. Knapp,Lausanne 1992,(https://www.worldcat.org/title/daniel-garbade-encres-de-chine-autour-du-fake-book-galerie-knapp-lausanne-16-mai-27-juin-1992/oclc/715285050&referer=brief_results)
 Agustina Bessa Luís:Le Fake-book. Joel Barès, Paris 1992,
 Eduardo Naval, Daniel Garbade:Retrospectiva. Caja Rural, Toledo 1993
 José Saramago, Vicente Molina Foix u.a.: Côctel. El Wisli, Toledo 1996, 
 Daniel Garbade: Pinturas. Editor Miguel Barbaran PI, Madrid 2000, (https://www.worldcat.org/title/daniel-garbade-pinturas-junio-2000-alejandro-arteche-phe00/oclc/795743991&referer=brief_results)
 Daniel Garbade u.a.: Desayuno para Inmigrantes. Ayuntamiento de Madrid, Madrid 2003
 Leopoldo Alas:Hablar desde el trapecio, Editor Libertarias, Madrid 1995, 
 Juan María Crespo: Aprendemos con las letras.Editor McGraw-Hill, Madrid 2002, 
 Michael T. Ganz: La petite mort. El Wisli, Madrid 2006, S.4-5, 
 José Luís Uriondo: La aventura de las matemáticas.Editor McGraw-Hill, Madrid 2002, 
 José Luís Uriondo: Aprendemos con las matemáticas. Mc Graw Hill, Madrid 2002 
 Beatriz Gimeno: Cosas de Casados.Editor Asociacion Cultural Visible, Madrid 2006, 
 Daniel Garbade: Reload.Editor El Wisli, Madrid 2011, 
 Leopoldo Alas: La loca aventura de vivir,Editor Odisea, Madrid 2009, 
 Sivasailam Thiagarajan:Interaktive Trainingsmethoden ,Editor Wochenschau Verlag, Dr, Kurt Debus GMBH, Schwalbach am Taunus 2014, ,
 Daniel Garbade:Cut , Editor Artzeitmagazine, Zúrich 2014, 
Daniel Garbade: En cama con Greco y Picasso, Toledo 2018, 
José Infante: Goya on the Beach, Madrid 2019, 
Daniel Garbade: Armas y Almas, Madrid 2019, 