Jenee Fleenor is an American musician. In 2019, she became the first woman named the Country Music Association's Musician of the Year and the first fiddle player to win the award in over 20 years. Fleenor performs with Jon Pardi, Blake Shelton, Steven Tyler, Cody Johnson, Rascal Flatts, and more. She has written songs for many of the same musicians, as well as Dolly Parton, Gretchen Wilson, Kathy Mattea and more.

Early life

Fleenor was born in Springdale, Arkansas. She started learning to play the violin when she was three-years-old. She studied the Suzuki method of playing. She used to play alongside her parents, with her mother playing the piano and her father, the violin. Fleenor started playing the fiddle, at the age of five, after hearing the song Faded Love by Bob Wills. She became a fiddle player for the band at a local opry house when she was ten. She found influence in the fiddle playing of Mark O'Connor. She tried to dress like him when she was a girl. 

She relocated to Nashville, Tennessee in 2001 to attend college. She sat in with a bluegrass band during a show and Larry Cordle asked her a few days later to perform with him. She quit college and became full time musician. 

Career

Fleenor is a plays fiddle, mandolin and acoustic guitar. She also is a singer-songwriter.

Early in her career, she toured with Martina McBride and Terri Clark. In the 2010s, she began playing mandolin and acoustic guitar to compensate for low industry demand for fiddle. She was named the Country Music Association's Touring Musician of the Year in 2015. She began performing with Jon Pardi, a neotraditional singer-songwriter credited with helping to keep traditional instruments in popular country. She performed fiddle on Pardi's 2019 album Heartache Medication, including the song by the same title. 

In 2019, she released her debut album, Fiddle & Steel. That same year, she was nominated for, and awarded, the Country Music Association's Musician of the Year Award, the first for a woman. That same year, she was nominated for the Academy of Country Music's Speciality Instrument Player of the Year Award, the only woman to ever be nominated for the award. Fleenor currently performs with Steven Tyler and Blake Shelton. She also performs regularly in the house band on The Voice.