The anime television series The Laughing Salesman is based in on the Japanese manga series of the same name created by Fujiko A. Fujio.  The first animated series was produced by Shin-Ei Animation and commenced screening on TBS on 17 October 1989 and extended for three seasons with a total of 112 episodes which included 9 specials. The series was directed by Yoshitomo Yonetani with scripts by Yasuo Tanami and music by Kōhei Tanaka.

The series began with a short 4 minute prologue and each episode is 10 minutes in length. A number of specials were also released, often double-length and containing two separate self-contained stories. The names of the characters in the summaries are written in the Japanese order with "surname" or "upper name" () then "first name" because the order is significant to obtain the alternate meaning or reference when both names are read aloud.

 Episode List: Season 1 
The first animated series was produced by Shin-Ei Animation and commenced screening on TBS on 17 October 1989. The series was directed by Yoshitomo Yonetani with scripts by Yasuo Tanami and music by Kōhei Tanaka.

The series began with a short 4 minute prologue and each episode is 10 minutes in length. A number of specials were also released, often double-length and containing two separate self-contained stories. The names of the characters are written in the Japanese order with "surname" or "upper name" () then "first name" because the order is significant to obtain the alternate meaning or reference when both names are read aloud.

 	 Titles	 Release date	  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  

 Episode List: Season 2 
Season 2 was broadcast from March 1991 to March 1992 and comprised 44 episodes and 5 specials.
 	 Titles	 Release date	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Episode List: The Laughing Salesman NEW 
A second anime adaptation series titled  was released in 2017. It was directed by Hirofumi Ogura at Shin-Ei Animation and scripts were written by Naohiro Fukushima, Asami Ishikawa and Midori Natsu written. Fujio Suzuki created the character designs and was also the chief animation director. Minoru Nishida was the art director, Akiko Inoue was in charge of color design and Kohei Tanaka composed the music. 

The series aired on Tokyo MX from April 3, 2017 to June 19, 2017. It was streamed on Crunchyroll, making it first The Laughing Salesman material available online outside Japan. The opening song is titled "Don't" by NakamuraEri while the ending theme is titled  by Mike Sugiyama.

Each episode is 20 minutes in length and consists of two separate, unrelated stories. Some episodes contain remakes of stories shown in the first series.

 No. Titles Release date