eSight is a wearable medical device designed to improve the functional vision of those living with low vision or legal blindness. The device was developed by Canadian-based tech firm eSight Corp.

 History 
eSight was founded in 2006 by Conrad Lewis, a Canadian electrical engineer with two legally blind sisters. His motivation was to build a device that would enable his sisters to see, be able to work and independently perform virtually all activities of daily living (ADLs). He spent seven years developing the breakthrough technology.

The first generation of the device, eSight 1, was released in October 2013. The second generation, eSight 2, was released in May 2015 and contained several hardware upgrades, including HD OLED screens, enhanced color and screen resolution and a longer battery life.

The current generation, eSight 4, was released in July 2020, based on years of extensive research and feedback from eSight 3 users, eSight 4 is the most versatile and mobile device for life on the go.The device has been clinically proven to significantly enhance vision for those living with low vision and legal blindness. Its users typically have between 20/60 and 20/800 visual acuity, with some up to 20/1400 acuity, across over 20 different eye conditions, ranging from cataracts to macular degeneration, optic atrophy, and retinal detachment. The eSight 4 is priced at $5,950 USD —the same as eSight 3 — with the option of $99 per month financing. Potential buyers can also benefit from a special crowd-funding platform, and eSight helps them with outreach to employers, community groups and other organizations that might bear some of the cost.  

 Specifications 
alt=eSight 4|276x276px|eSight 4
eSight 4 includes two dual independent 1280 X 960 high-resolution OLED color screens, users can manually adjust the inter-pupillary (left-right) distance of the screens and their depth relative to conventional eyeglasses, enabling users to achieve up to 20/20 visual acuity. A fabric-lined halo-style headband magnetically holds a three-hour battery in the back while permitting the front screens to tilt bioptically in a range of +35 to -10 degrees.

 Features 

 Adjustable halo band comfortably and securely fits children and adults
 Streamlined visor with adjustable arms fits over prescription glasses
 Advanced software auto-focus, image stabilization, and personalization options
 18 MP camera for stunning clarity paired with best-fit lenses
 Patented bioptic tilt adjusts between +35° to -10°
 Touchpad and menu control integrated into headset as well as a wireless remote and Web account controls
 Android® and Apple® mobile apps
 eCast and eMirror with the eSight mobile apps
 Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and HDMI connectivity
 256 GB storage, 3 integrated speakers and a built-in flashlight
 2 rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, each up to 3 hours of continuous use
 and many more applications

 Qualifications 
The eSight 4 has been approved on the United States Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) Federal Supply Schedule (FSS) which allows eSight to be included on the FSS through December 2023. eSight is registered with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and EUDAMED, and is inspected by Health Canada. eSight has also received the CE Mark certification signifying that eSight 4 has been assessed to meet high safety, health and environmental protection requirements in Europe.

 Clinical Studies 
In 2018, eSight published results from eQUEST (The eSight Quality of Life and Efficacy Study), a multi-center, clinical study, conducted independently at six preeminent low-vision research and rehabilitation institutions in the United States and Canada with a study group of 51 subjects. Published in the September 2018 issue of Optometry and Vision Science, the conclusion showed that eSight introduction yields immediate improvements in visual ability, with face recognition and ADLs showing a tentative benefit of further use. Overall, visual ability, reading, and visual information showed greatest benefit with device use.

 COVID-19 Response 
alt=Virtual webinar|251x251px|Virtual webinar
On March 24, 2020, eSight launched #eSightTogether, a place for connection and support during the COVID-19 outbreak. The #eSightTogether website contains a list of the most pertinent resources for people with visual impairments to stay informed about COVID-19 and access useful tools for managing daily life during this stressful time. These tools include carefully curated low vision resources, at-home entertainment, and educational materials ideal for social distancing, and eSight coaches will also be holding virtual webinars bi-weekly.

On April 9, 2020, eSight announced eSight Workplace, a full service COVID-19 compliant program that enables low vision employees to become productive in a non-touch, socially responsible way. eSight Workplace provides an all-in-one electronic device in the form of an electronic vision device that brings all of an organization’s remotely accessible technology – including native applications – into the employee’s device screen that they can see and control.

 Partnerships 
In December 2019, eSight partnered with Dell Technologies and Ballet Austin to gift 22 Austin, Texas residents with a pair of eSight glasses to witness the iconic Nutcracker ballet in a special live performance for the visually impaired.

TELUS partnered with eSight in November 2019 to host eSight Experience Day at TELUS Vancouver, which highlighted the importance of accessibility for all, where people could book a 45 minute eSight experience to try on the eSight 3.

In honour of World Sight Day 2019, eSight partnered with CNIB, to expand access of eSight 3 to individuals living with sight loss in Canada. Over the next 12 months after the partnership was announced, the program was slated to expand to CNIB locations across Canada with training provided by both eSight and CNIB, in order to provide greater ease of access and training support for low vision Canadians.

 Awards 

 2020 Global Impact Award Finalist - Sam Ifergan (Chairman of the Board at eSight), YPO
2019 Best Wearable Technology Solution, Health Tech Digital Awards
 2019 Outstanding Product Achievement, CATA Gala
 2018 Best Breakthrough Technology, 7th Annual Canadian Innovation Awards Winner
 2018 One of Canada's Most Innovative Companies, Canadian Innovation Exchange Advisory Board
 2018 George Alexander BAVF Corporate Volunteer Award, Blinded American Veterans Foundation
 2017 The 25 Best Inventions in 2017, TIME Magazine
2017 Best Tech of 2017 So Far, TIME Magazine
2017 6 Inventions Changing British People's Lives In 2017, Buzzfeed News
 2016 Chairman's Awards for Advancements in Accessibility, Federal Communications Commission USA