SpiNNaker (Spiking Neural Network Architecture) is a massively parallel, manycore supercomputer architecture designed by the Advanced Processor Technologies Research Group (APT) at the Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester.Advanced Processor Technologies Research Group  It is composed of 57,600 processing nodes, each with 18 ARM9 processors (specifically ARM968) and 128 MB of mobile DDR SDRAM, totalling 1,036,800 cores and over 7 TB of RAM.  The computing platform is based on spiking neural networks, useful in simulating the human brain (see Human Brain Project).A million ARM cores to host brain simulator News article on the project in the EE Times A manifesto for the SpiNNaker project, surveying and reviewing the general level of understanding of brain function and approaches to building computer modelof the brain. A description of the Globally Asynchronous, Locally Synchronous (GALS) nature of SpiNNaker, with an overview of the asynchronous communications hardware designed to transmit neural 'spikes' between processors. Modelling and analysis of the SpiNNaker interconnect in a million-core machine, showing the suitability of the packet-switched network for large-scale spiking neural network simulation. A demonstration of SpiNNaker's ability to simulate different neural models (simultaneously, if necessary) in contrast to other neuromorphic hardware. Four-chip, real-time simulation of a four-million-synapse cortical circuit, showing the extreme energy efficiency of the SpiNNaker architecture

The completed design is housed in 10 19-inch racks, with each rack holding over 100,000 cores.Video interview by computerphile with Steve Furber The cards holding the chips are held in 5 blade enclosures, and each core emulates 1000 Neurons.  In total, the goal is to simulate the behavior of aggregates of up to a billion neurons in real time.  This machine requires about 100 kW from a 240 V supply and an air-conditioned environment.

SpiNNaker is being used as one component of the neuromorphic computing platform for the Human Brain Project.

On 14 October 2018 the HBP announced that the million core milestone had been achieved.

On 24 September 2019 HBP announced that a 8 million euro grant, that will fund construction of the second generation machine, (called SpiNNcloud) has been given to TU Dresden.