The WWE Year-End Awards is a concept used by WWE, where awards, similar to the Academy and Grammy Awards, are given to professional wrestlers at the end of the year who have performed on Raw and SmackDown. Introduced in 2018, there have been two editions of the concept. In the first edition, the winners were voted by fans, while for the second, WWE picked the winner themselves. Previously, wrestlers from Raw and SmackDown had been rewarded Slammy Awards between 1986 and 2015.

 Winners and nominees 
 2018 awards 
The 2018 WWE Year-End Awards were revealed on December 23, 2018, on WWE's Instagram Stories. The results were voted by fans.

 Braun Strowman Becky Lynch The Bar (Cesaro and Sheamus) Elias Naomi Becky Lynch vs. Charlotte Flair – Evolution Brock Lesnar vs. Roman Reigns Dean Ambrose Paul Heyman Ronda Rousey – promo against Nikki Bella Randy Orton – tearing Jeff Hardy's ear Paige Baron Corbin Raw Titus O'Neil – falling at the Greatest Royal Rumble The Shield (Dean Ambrose, Roman Reigns and Seth Rollins)

 2019 awards 
The 2019 WWE Year-End Awards were announced on December 24, 2019, on WWE Backstage, with Renee Young, Booker T, Christian, Maria Menounos and Ember Moon as the hosts. This time, WWE picked the winners themselves. The reveals also featured nominees, although no previous announcements had been made about who was in contention for the awards.

Winners are listed first, highlighted in boldface.
 "The Fiend" Bray Wyatt
 Brock Lesnar
 Kofi Kingston
 Seth Rollins Becky Lynch
 Bayley
 Charlotte Flair
 Ronda Rousey The New Day (Big E, Kofi Kingston and Xavier Woods)
 The O.C. (Luke Gallows and Karl Anderson)
 The Revival (Scott Dawson and Dash Wilder)
 The Viking Raiders (Ivar and Erik) The Kabuki Warriors (Asuka and Kairi Sane)
 Alexa Bliss and Nikki Cross
 The Boss 'n' Hug Connection (Bayley and Sasha Banks)
 The IIconics (Billie Kay and Peyton Royce) Kofi Kingston – winning the WWE Championship at WrestleMania
 Becky Lynch – winning the Raw and SmackDown Women's Championships at WrestleMania Lacey Evans and Natalya – wrestling the first-ever women’s wrestling match in Saudi Arabia at Crown Jewel
| style="vertical-align:top;" width="50%"|

 The Street Profits (Angelo Dawkins and Montez Ford)'''
 Nikki Cross
 Ricochet
 The Viking Raiders (Ivar and Erik)