The U of L Sports Network is the radio network of the University of Louisville Cardinals. It consists of fifteen (15) radio stations in primarily located in Kentucky, but the network serves much of Kentucky and southern Indiana.

On-air personalities
Paul Rogers (Play-by-play commentator (men's basketball and Louisville Cardinals football)) 
Bob Valvano (Color analyst (men's basketball))
Doug Ormay (Color analyst, alternate (men's basketball)/Sideline reporter (football)) 
Tony Stallings (Color Analyst, (football)) 
Craig Swabek (Color analyst, alternate (football))
Jim Kelch (Play-by-play commentator (Women's basketball) 
Adrienne Johnson (Color analyst (women's basketball))

Affiliates

Immediate Louisville area
City of license/Area served Station Frequency Notes References  Louisville  WHAS-AM  840  WHAS is a 50,000 watt Clear-channel AM station, so any of the Louisville Cardinals' night games that broadcast on that station's airwaves can also be heard in much of the eastern United States and portions of southeastern Canada.Airs any games that do not conflict with the scheduling of University of Kentucky Wildcats games from the UK Sports Network.  "U of L Radio Network Affiliates". Louisville Cardinals. WKRD-AM  790  Alternate affiliate for Louisville men's basketball and football when schedules on WHAS conflict with Kentucky Wildcats men's basketball and football.Flagship station for the U of L women's basketball game broadcasts.   New Albany, Indiana WLRS  1570  U of L Baseball only  Shelbyville/Louisville, KY  WVKY  101.7  Women's basketball only

Kentucky (outside the Louisville area)
City of license/Area served Station Frequency Notes References  Bowling Green  WBGN AM 1340   http://gocards.com/news/2013/6/24/Cards_Add_Two_Radio_Network_Affiliates.aspx Calvert City/Gilbertsville WCCK  95.7 FM Also serves the Paducah, Kentucky/Metropolis, Illinois area   "U of L Radio Network Affiliates". Louisville Cardinals. Fort Knox/Elizabethtown  WLVK  105.5 FM  Harlan  WHLN-AM  1410    Harold/Pikeville  WXLR  104.9  Also serves parts of southwestern West Virginia and westernmost Virginia   Liberty  WKDO  FM 98.7  Mayfield  WYMC  1430 AM  W230BN  93.9 FM FM Translator of WYMC-AM/Mayfield   Mount Sterling/Lexington  WWRW  105.5   Paducah  WPAD  1560 AM   W258AN 99.5 FM  FM translator of WPAD-AM 1560/Paducah  Somerset  WSFC  1240 AM  

Southwest Ohio
City of license/Area served Station Frequency Notes References  Cincinnati  WCKY  1530 AM WCKY is a 50,000 watt Clear-channel AM station, so any of the Cardinals' night games that broadcast on that station's airwaves can also be heard in much of the eastern United States and portions of southeastern Canada.Airs any games that do not conflict with University of Kentucky Wildcats games from the UK Sports Network.  WSAI  1360 AM  Alternate affiliate for Louisville men's basketball and football when schedules on WCKY conflict with Kentucky Wildcats men's basketball and football.Flagship station for the U of L women's basketball game broadcasts. 

USA Nationwide
U of L Sports Network broadcasts can also be heard via Sirius XM Radio.2011 U of L Football Games on Sirius Satellite Radio 2011-12 U of L Men's Basketball SIRIUS Satellite Radio Broadcast Information 