George Taylor is a fictional character appearing in Superman comic books published by DC Comics. He is the editor-in-chief of the Metropolis newspaper the Daily Star. An early Superman supporting character, he was created by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster as the unnamed editor who gave Clark Kent his first job as a reporter in Action Comics #1 (June 1938). His name was later revealed in Superman #2 (1939). Perry White replaced him as the Editor-in-Chief of the Daily Planet in Superman #7 (October 1940). In the New 52 the character is once again running the Daily Star. 

Fictional character biography
Golden Age
Virtually nothing is known about the background of this version of the character, but his personality as a newspaper editor was well defined. He was irascible, yelling at his reporters when angry or excited, but he was also a model of courage, loyalty, and integrity. When the superintendent of a labor camp claimed that reports about him in the Daily Star were libelous, Taylor would not apologize, saying that the information they had obtained was authoritative, and he dared the superintendent to sue. He also defended the reporter's pledge not to reveal the source of information.Action Comics #10 (March 1939). DC Comics.

Taylor at first refused to hire the inexperienced Clark Kent as a reporter, but later changed his mind when Kent brought in the story of an attempted lynching.Superman #1 (July 1939). DC Comics. He shortly made it Kent's steady assignment to cover the reports about the existence of someone called Superman. However, when Lois Lane, the Stars "lonelyhearts" column writer, claimed the next day to have met Superman, Taylor didn't believe her, asking if she had actually seen pink elephants.Action Comics #1 (June 1938). DC Comics. This was indicative of the difference in Taylor's attitude toward Kent and Lane: he was very supportive of Clark, giving him a variety of assignments including South American war correspondent, but if Lois asked for an important story she was told by her editor that it was "no job for a girl!" To be fair, Kent received his share of abuse, as when Taylor called him a "brainless idiot" and fired him for flubbing an assignment. But the editor gave Clark his job back when he brought in the story,Action Comics #5 (October 1938). DC Comics. and he actually softened toward Lois over time. Taylor also admitted it when he was wrong, as he did when he accused Kent of betraying his confidential source for cowardly reasons.Action Comics #10 (March 1939). DC Comics.

In the spring of 1940, the newspaper Taylor edited inexplicably changed its name to the Daily Planet.Superman #4 (Spring 1940). DC Comics.Action Comics #23 (April 1940). DC Comics. He retained his position until November of that year,Action Comics #30 (November 1940). DC Comics. after which time a new editor, Perry White, was suddenly introduced.Superman #7 (November–December 1940). DC Comics.

Earth-Two
When DC Comics created the multiverse, the Superman of Earth-Two was assigned all the characteristics and baggage of the early Golden Age version of the character, and this included the Daily Star and George Taylor, who was still editor when Clark Kent and Lois Lane got married following a fight with Wizard.Action Comics #484 (June 1978). DC Comics. Upon announcing his retirement in the early 1950s, Taylor chose his successor by way of a competition between Kent and senior reporter Perry White. By solving a famous missing-person case, White proved the superior reporter but ironically lost the editor's job to Kent because Taylor felt that the better reporter shouldn't be locked to a desk.Superman Family #196 (November–December 1979). DC Comics. Sometime after retiring, Taylor discovered a filmstrip depicting Kent changing to Superman, but he promised Clark that he would never reveal the Man of Steel's secret identity. However, corrupt reporter Rod Pilgrim overheard the conversation and subsequently murdered Taylor to acquire the filmstrip. Superman confronted Pilgrim, convinced him that the images were part of a gag film, and turned the killer over to police.Superman Family #209 (August 1981). DC Comics.

Earth-One
In Superman #366 (December 1981) George Taylor was shown to be the editor of the Daily Planet on Earth-One before Perry White. Taylor, who had succeeded a man named Morton, chose White to replace him when he retired at age sixty-five, an event that coincided with Clark Kent's junior year at Metropolis University.Superman: The Secret Years #4 (May 1985). DC Comics. George Taylor's son George Taylor Jr. became editor of the Daily Star in Star City and continuously tried to prove that Oliver Queen was the masked hero Green Arrow. George Taylor's grandson George Taylor III was a record-breaking pole vaulter.World's Finest Comics #244 (April–May 1977). DC Comics.

Post-Crisis
After the Crisis on Infinite Earths wiped out the multiverse and replaced it with one Earth, the Metropolis Daily Star with George Taylor as editor was a rival paper to the Daily Planet, which was edited by Perry White.The Adventures of Superman #451 (February 1989). DC Comics. Taylor was still in his position as late as 2002.Superman (vol. 2) #183 (August 2002). DC Comics. When Superman was cast into a Golden-Age reality during the "Dominus Effect" storyline of 1998, the original Taylor briefly reappeared.

The New 52
In 2011, "The New 52" rebooted the DC universe. George Taylor was reintroduced in Action Comics (vol. 2) #8 as the publisher of the Daily Star.

In other media
Television
 George Taylor appears in the Adventures of Superman episode "The Evil Three". This version is a hotel manager who is murdered by his nephew, who sought to gain his fortune.
 George Taylor appears in the Smallville episode "Delete", portrayed by Jim Thorburn. This version is a Daily Planet editor who is killed by his assistant, who had been brainwashed by Molly Griggs.
 George Taylor makes a cameo appearance in the My Adventures with Superman episode "Most Eligible Superman", voiced by an uncredited actor. This version is a reporter for the Metropolis Star.

Film
George Taylor appears in Superman: Red Son, voiced by Jim Ward. A green check mark indicates that a role has been confirmed using a screenshot (or collage of screenshots) of a title's list of voice actors and their respective characters found in its credits or other reliable sources of information.