The Florida Institute for Human & Machine Cognition (IHMC) is a not-for-profit research institute of the State University System of Florida, with locations in Pensacola and Ocala, Florida. IHMC scientists and engineers investigate a broad range of topics related to building technological systems aimed at amplifying and extending human cognitive, physical and perceptual capacities. These include artificial intelligence, robotics, human-centered computing, agile and distributed computing and many related areas."Manning up: IHMC Explores the Intersection of Man and Machine." January 2013. AUVSI Magazine.Hamilton, Scott. "Thinking Outside the Box at the IHMC". Computer , January 2001. (Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press).

History
1990—IHMC is founded as a research institute by Dr. Kenneth M. Ford, Dr. Alberto Cañas, and Dr. Bruce Dunn on the campus of the University of West Florida, growing primarily out of the computer science and psychology departments.Kenneth M. Ford, et al. "Coordinating Behavior of Distributed Systems," AI Magazine, Summer 2010.    Also: State University System of Florida, Board of Governors; online publication.

2004—The Florida Legislature, under the K-20 Education Code, establishes IHMC as an independent, statewide research institute.Florida Statute 1004.447.   IHMC maintains affiliations with several Florida universities.State University System of Florida, Board of Governors. Online publication.

2007—IHMC is recognized by the U.S. Economic Development Administration for the institute's impact on downtown Pensacola.U.S. Economic Development Administration / U.S. Department of Commerce; online publication.

2008—IHMC director becomes chairman of the NASA Advisory Council.

2010—IHMC opens a new research facility in downtown Ocala in central Florida.Barnett, Cynthia. "Human, Machine Research Institute Joins Ocala's Downtown". Florida Trend. Summer 2010.

2013—A team from IHMC competes in the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Robotics
Challenge, placing first in the Virtual Robotics Challenge and second in the DRC Trials.Davis, Brett. "Robots Open Doors and Drive Cars and Chop Through Walls And..." Unmanned Systems Magazine, Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International, September 2013.  Also: "Robotics Challenge Teams to Compete for $2 Million Top Prize." AUVSI News. Mar 5, 2015."Team IHMC's Lessons Learned from the DARPA Robotics Challenge Trials". Journal of Field Robotics. March 2015.

2014—An IHMC robot sets a new land-speed record for legged robots.Ackerman, Evan. "This Is What DARPA's Robot Ostrich Will Look Like". IEEE Spectrum. Nov. 14, 2011.     Also: "IHMC robot sets world speed record," IHMC website.    Also that year, DARPA awards IHMC scientists a $3 million grant to research Big Mechanisms, using computers to analyze vast amounts of research and identify underlying mechanisms in complex systems.“Big Mechanisms Seeks the ‘Whys’ Hidden in Big Data.” DARPA website, Feb. 20, 2014.  Also: Cohen, Paul R. “DARPA’s Big Mechanisms Program.” DARPA online publication.

2015—IHMC's team of robotics scientists places second and is awarded $1 million in the final round of the DARPA Robotics Challenge. The competition pitted bipedal robots from 23 teams from around the world on a course that emulated a disaster area where humans could not safely go. The robots had to drive a car, open a door, turn a valve, throw a switch, cut a hole in a wall, walk over rubble and climb stairs.Time Magazine, June 8, 2015. "The Iron Man Challenge."    Also, The New York Times, June 6, 2015.  Also, DARPA website theroboticschallenge.org .   Also this year, IHMC breaks ground on a 30,000-square-foot building in downtown Pensacola, with expanded laboratories, research areas and offices."IHMC breaks ground on new 30,000-square-foot-building." Pensacola News Journal. (Feb. 9, 2015).    Also this year, IHMC senior research scientist Jerry Pratt is named to the Florida Inventors Hall of Fame.Florida Inventors Hall of Fame web page. http://www.floridainvents.org

2016—IHMC's robotic team participates in the Cybathlon, an international competition for cyber-assisted athletes.  IHMC's Mark Daniel piloted MinaV2, IHMC's third generation paraplegic mobility exoskeleton, and placed second in the powered exoskeleton race. https://www.vice.com/en/article/ezebz4/the-cybathlon-where-paraplegics-walk-again

2020-IHMC's robotic exoskeleton team participates in two international competitions, Cybathlon 2020 and the Mobility Unlimited Challenge sponsored by the Toyota Mobility Foundation. https://cybathlon.ethz.ch/enhttps://mobilityunlimited.org

Current research
IHMC’s human-centered research is focused on the development of technological systems designed to amplify human cognitive, physical, and perceptual abilities."Manning up: IHMC Explores the Intersection of Man and Machine." AUVSI Magazine. January 2013.You, Jia. "DARPA Sets Out to Automate Research". Science Magazine. January 2015.

Research areas include biologically-inspired robotics, including humanoids and exoskeletons;"NASA and IHMC Develop Robotic Exoskeleton for Space and Possible Use on Earth". NASA News; online publication. Oct. 11, 2012.   Also: "Development of the IHMC Mobility Assist Exoskeleton". IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, May, 2009.  human-centered interfaces and displays;Hoffman, R., et al: "The Borg Hypothesis." Computer.org/Intelligent; IEEE Computer Society. September/October 2003.   artificial intelligence;Kenneth M. Ford, et al.  "Coordinating Behavior of Distributed Systems," AI Magazine. Summer 2010.    Also: Kenneth M. Ford, Patrick Hayes. "On Computational Wings. Rethinking the Goals of Artificial Intelligence." Scientific American Presents: Machine Intelligence, 1998.  adjustable autonomy; knowledge modeling and sharing; human-machine teamwork, collaboration and coordination; communication, information management and dissemination in challenging networked environments; software agents; expertise studies; computer and network security; natural language understanding; work-practice simulation; knowledge representation; agile and distributed computing;Tortonesi, M., et al. "Multiple UAV Coordinate and Communications in Tactical Edge Networks," IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol 50, Issue 10. October 2012. trust in autonomy; and concept mapping.Robert R. Hoffman, et al. "A Method for Eliciting, Preserving, and Sharing the Knowledge of Forecasters." Weather Forecast. 2006.

IHMC has received research funding from government and private-sector sources, including DARPA, the National Science Foundation, NASA, Army, Navy, Air Force, National Institutes of Health, and other agencies, foundations and companies.Bradshaw, Jeffrey M. "Invited Talk: Human-Agent Teamwork in Cyber Defense". Multiagent System Technologies: 10th German Conference, October 2012.

Scientific and technical (S&T) staff
IHMC is home to more than 100 researchers and technical staff, many of whom are leading figures in their research fields.Kenneth M. Ford, et al. "Coordinating Behavior of Distributed Systems." AI Magazine. Summer 2010.   Also: "People / Scientific and Technical". IHMC web page.  Six researchers associated with IHMC have been named fellows at the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. The Fellows List. http://www.aaai.org/Awards/fellows-current.php. Four people affiliated with IHMC have been inducted as fellows into the National Academy of Inventors.National Academy of Inventors. NAI Fellows List. http://www.academyofinventors.org.

Facilities
IHMC has multiple research facilities located in Pensacola and Ocala Florida.

Outreach
IHMC sponsors a number of outreach efforts in the local community, including a public Evening Lecture Series in both Pensacola and Ocala. The series has hosted dozens of notable speakers and in 2011 was recognized by STEMflorida Inc., a not-for-profit group that promotes science, technology, engineering and math education. IHMC also supports local education through programs such as its Science Saturdays, I LOVE Science, and robotics open houses and summer camps.National Robotics Week web site; 2015 Events; iRobot Corp. http://www.nationalroboticsweek.org/events.php 

Evening Lecture Series
In early 2000, IHMC began production on the Evening Lecture Series.  Each lecture features a visiting researcher, thought leader, or public figure and focuses on educating the public on a variety of topics. There are over two hundred IHMC Evening Lectures hosted on YouTube as of December 2020. https://www.youtube.com/user/TheIHMC   

 Notable Guests 
https://www.youtube.com/user/TheIHMC

Malcolm Gladwell
Ray Gindroz
Judith Ramaley
Carol Coletta
Richard Florida
Joe Riley
Barry Barish
Rita Colwell
Robert Davis
Jeff Baxter
John T. Edge
Kathy Sullivan

STEM-Talk

STEM-Talk is a bi-weekly podcast produced by the Florida Institute for Human & Machine Cognition.  The podcast launched on March 1, 2016 with guest Peter Attia discussing his research into health and longevity.https://www.ihmc.us/stemtalk/episode001/
As of December 2020, there are 116 episodes with subjects discussing a wide variety of research topics.https://www.ihmc.us/stemtalks/

STEM-Talk received the 2017 & 2019 Skeptics Guide to Science & Medicine award from the People's Choice Podcast Awards,https://www.podcastawards.com and was nominated for the 2019 Science & Education Webby Award. https://winners.webbyawards.com/winners/podcasts/individual-episodes-mini-series-specials/science-education

 STEM-Talk Guests 
https://www.ihmc.us/stemtalks/

Health & Longevity

Peter Attia
Rhonda Patrick
Greg Smith
Mark Mattson
Dale Bredesen
Kirk Parsley
Dominic D'Agostino
Joan Vernikos
Colin Champ
Alessio Fasano
Doug McGuff
Robb Wolf
Richard Moon
Art De Any
Claire Fraser
Jim Stray-Gundersen
Stuart McGill
Gary Taubes
Mark Lupo
David Diamond
Jeff Volek
Tommy Wood
Nina Teicholz
Brianna Stubbs
Brian Caulfield
Flora Hammond
Stephen Cunnane
Keith Barr
Valter Longo
Brendan Egan
Steve Anton
David Sabatini
Michael Okun
Satchin Panda
Stu Phillips
Charles Brenner
Megan Roberts
Robert Epstein
John Newman
Emma Wilson
Steve Austad
Katherine Eban
Abe Morgentaler
Francisco Gonzalez-Lima
Lilianne Mujica-Parodi
Marcas Bamman

Science & Technology

Brother Guy Consolmagno
Harrison Schmitt
Margaret Leinen
Michael Turner
Rusty Schweickart
Barry Barish
Kelvin Droegemeier
Pascal Lee
Yorick Wilks
Kerry Emanuel
Michael D. Griffin
James Briscione
Mike L. Gernhardt
Michael Turner
Natalie Batalha
Suzana Herculano-Houzel
Thomas David Jones
Jerry Pratt
Chris McKay
Kenneth M. Ford
Jon Clark
Lauren Jackson
Peter Neuhaus
Peter Norvig
Robert Mueller
Dava Newman
Jeff Phillips
Butler Hine
Matt Johnson
Robert Epstein
Irina Conboy
Michael Conboy
Dick Despommier
Francesca Rossi
Dave Rabin
Timothy J. Broderick
Peter Pirolli