Notion is an application that provides components such as databases, kanban boards, wikis, calendars and reminders. Users can connect these components to create their own systems for knowledge management, note taking, data management, project management, among others. These components and systems can be used individually, or in collaboration with others.

History
Notion Labs Inc, a startup based in San Francisco, was founded in 2016. The founders declined to meet venture capitalists or discuss acquiring a higher valuation.

The app launched in March 2016 for web browsers and OS X, May 2017 for Microsoft Windows, and June 2017 for iOS.

In March 2018, the software was upgraded to Notion 2.0, receiving praise on Product Hunt as #1 Product of the Month, and being featured on an article in WSJ. The company had fewer than 10 employees at this point.

In June 2018, an official app for Android was released.

In September 2019, the company announced it hit 1 million users.

In April 2020, the company raised a round at a $2 billion valuation with 4 million users. 

 Software 
Notion is a collaboration platform with modified markdown support that integrates kanban boards, tasks, wikis, and databases. The company claims to be an all-in-one workspace for note-taking, knowledge and data management, project and task management.The software is described as a file management tool offering a unified workspace, allowing users to comment on ongoing projects, to participate in discussions and receive feedback from others. In addition to cross-platform apps, it can be accessed via most web browsers. It features a web clipper. The company's tool helps users to schedule tasks, manage files, save documents and set a reminder for the weekly agenda, enabling users to organize their work. It allows users to embed any online content within Notion pages using Embed.ly.

 Pricing 
Notion has a four-tiered subscription model: free, personal, team, and enterprise. The application offers an account credit system, and can earn credit via referrals. Users will not be charged if they have a remaining balance in their accounts. An academic email address allows for a free personal plan.
As of May 2020, the company upgraded the Personal Plan to allow an unlimited number of blocks as opposed to the cap on the number of blocks till then. This allows all new users the benefit of having unlimited storage.

 Integrations 
Notion allows users the connection to Slack, the inclusion of inline LaTeX and the importation of data from other applications, such as Trello.