Bryan Young (born July 6, 1974) is an American bassoonist and technology entrepreneur.

Biography
Young was born in Washington D.C., and later moved to Baltimore. He is African-American. 

Career
Bassoonist
As a bassoonist, Young is a founding member of the Poulenc Trio, where he has toured internationally and collaborated with violinist Hilary Hahn, clarinetists David Shifrin, Anthony McGill and Alexander Fiterstein, and oboists Liang Wang and James Austin Smith. He appears on several commercial recordings with the Poulenc Trio, including Poulenc Plays Poulenc, Creation, and Trains of Thought. He is principal bassoonist with the Baltimore Chamber Orchestra and performs with the IRIS Orchestra in Memphis, TN. He was a finalist in the Fernand Gillet-Hugo Fox International Bassoon Competition, and has appeared as soloist with prominent American orchestras, including the National Symphony Orchestra and Baltimore Symphony Orchestra. Composers have dedicated works to Bryan Young, including Octavio Vázquez, Steven Gerber, and Thomas Benjamin. Young is a frequent guest commentator on Maryland's WBJC-FM radio program, Face the Music. Young serves as a board member of Chamber Music America.

Entrepreneur
As an entrepreneur, Young is recognized for his work in health care, software and e-commerce.  Young served as a judge advisor for the US Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)’ Artificial Intelligence (AI) Health Outcomes Challenge. As founder of Intertwine Systems, Young worked with Johns Hopkins researchers to deliver cardiac monitoring software to patients in Trinidad and Tobago, and was named a 'Mobile Entrepreneur to Watch' by the Baltimore Business Journal. Young was a partner and Chief Technical Advisor for SailTime, a global e-commerce platform for boating and leisure maritime activities.  Young is currently the Director of Connected Healthcare Solutions at Asymmetrik, where he leads digital healthcare transformation and innovation initiatives.

Discography
 Trains of Thought (2018). Poulenc Trio; Delos[ Trains of Thought], AllMusic
 Creation (2016). Poulenc Trio; Delos[ Creation], AllMusic
 Poulenc Plays Poulenc (2009). Poulenc Trio; Marquis Classics[ Poulenc Plays Poulenc], AllMusic