The AI for Good Global Summit is a United Nations platform, centered around annual Global Summits, that fosters the dialogue on the beneficial use of Artificial Intelligence, by developing concrete projects. The impetus for organizing global summits that are action oriented, came from existing discourse in artificial intelligence (AI) research being dominated by research streams such as the Netflix Prize (improve the movie recommendation algorithm).
 The AI for Good Global Summit series aims to bring forward Artificial Intelligence research topics that contribute towards more global problems, in particular through the Sustainable Development Goals. The AI for Good Global Summit 2020 has been moved online. AI for Good is co-organized by the Standardization Sector of ITU (ITU-T) and XPRIZE Foundation.

Global Summit 2020
The Global Summit 2020 was moved to online, including a series of webinars focused on using mobile phones for contact tracing was introduced. Speakers include:

 Muhammad Yunus
 Shwetak Patel
 Yoshua Bengio
 Peter Heine Nielsen

 Global Summit 2019 
The third AI for Good Global Summit took place from 28 May to 31 May, and gave rise to the ITU Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Autonomous and Assisted Driving with several Day 0 workshops and VIP events having taken place on May 27. Some of the speakers included:

Ray Kurzweil
Cedric Villani
Yoshua Bengio
Anousheh Ansari
Yves Daccord
Vladimir Kramnik
Klaus-Robert Müller
Jean-Philippe Courtois
Amir Ansari
Francis Gury
Petteri Taalas
Houlin Zhao
Soumya Swaminathan
Eileen Donahoe
Francesca Rossi
Ingmar Weber

 Global Summit 2018 
World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom (right) and ITU Secretary-General Houlin Zhao (center) 
The second AI for Good Global Summit took place from 15 to 17 May 2018 at the ITU headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland and generated 35 AI project proposals including the ITU-WHO Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Health with the World Health Organization. Speakers included:

 Roger Penrose
 Liu Yang (astronaut)
 Samantha Cristoforetti
 António Guterres
 Michael Møller
 Tedros Adhanom
 Mukhisa Kituyi
 Bill Peduto
 Stuart J. Russell
 Thomas Wiegand
 Huw Price
 Stephen Kelly
 H.E. Ahmed Al Theneyan
U.N. Envoy on Youth Jayathma Wickramanayake
Ingmar Weber

The ITU also relaunched its Journal ICT Discoveries during the 2018 Global Summit, with the first edition being a special on Artificial Intelligence.

 Global Summit 2017 
Fei-Fei Li speaking at AI for Good 2017

The first AI for Good Global summit took place from 7 to 9 June 2017. Speakers at the event included:

Pedro Domingos
Fei-Fei Li
 Gary Marcus
 Stuart J. Russell
 Jürgen Schmidhuber
 Rupert Stadler
 Manuela M. Veloso

One of the outcomes of the 2017 Global Summit was the creation of an ITU-T Focus Group on Machine Learning for 5G.

 AI Repository 
In order to further promote Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning research that advance the achieving of the Sustainable Development Goals, an AI Repository was created, which includes AI for Good projects and examples.

Related applications
Several similar terms have been used to describe related applications of AI to global issues. These include "AI for Earth", referring specifically to environmental applications; "Humanitarian AI", referring to applications for humanitarian ends; and "AI for Healthcare".