The Red Kimono is a 1925 American silent film drama about prostitution produced by Dorothy Davenport (billed as Mrs. Wallace Reid) and starring Priscilla Bonner.

Production background
The film is notable today for being one of the few independent productions produced and written by women. This is the third of Davenport's "social conscience" releases, preceded by Human Wreckage (1923) on the topic of drug addiction (released five months after Wallace Reid's death from morphine), and Broken Laws (1924) about excessive mother-love.

The film is based on a real case of prostitution that took place in New Orleans in 1917. This film, billing itself as a true story, used the real name of the woman played by Priscilla Bonner who as a consequence sued producer Dorothy Davenport and won. The case, Melvin v Reid has been cited recently in the emerging "right to be forgotten" cases around the world as an early example of one's right to leave a past one wishes to forget. In the ruling of the California Appellate Court (Melvin v. Reid, 112 Cal.App. 285, 297 P. 91 (1931)) the Court stated, "any person living a life of rectitude has that right to happiness which includes a freedom from unnecessary attacks on his character, social standing or reputation."

As with Davenport's earlier Human Wreckage in 1924, this film was banned in the United Kingdom by the British Board of Film Censors in 1926.The Red Kimono at the silentera.com database In the 1920s, the film was also banned in the city of Chicago.

Cast
Priscilla Bonner - Gabrielle Darley
Nellie Bly Baker - Clara Johnson, Gabrielle's neighbor
Carl Miller - Howard Blaine
Mary Carr - Prison Matron
Virginia Pearson - Mrs. Beverly Fontaine
Tyrone Power, Sr. - Gabrielle's father
Sheldon Lewis - District Attorney
Theodore von Eltz - Terrance O'Day or, Freddy Fred the Chauffeur
Emily Fitzroy - The Housekeeper
George Siegmann - Mr. Mack, A Client
Dot Farley - Inquisitive Woman
Max Asher - H.E. Reid, a Jeweler
Dorothy Davenport - Woman narrating the story (unbilled)
Ellinor Vanderveer - Woman with Defense Attorney's Wife
Lottie Williams - Crying Woman in rag clothes in Courtroom

Preservation status
A copy of this film is preserved at the Library of Congress.Catalog of Holdings The American Film Institute Collection and The United Artist Collection at The Library of Congress by The American Film Institute, c. 1978 A DVD edition was released in the early 2000s.