The 100 (pronounced The Hundred) is an American post-apocalyptic science fiction drama television series that premiered on March 19, 2014, on The CW and ended on September 30, 2020. The series, developed by Jason Rothenberg, is loosely based on the novel series of the same name by Kass Morgan.

The series follows a group of post-apocalyptic survivors, chiefly a group of criminal adolescents, including Clarke Griffin (Eliza Taylor), Finn Collins (Thomas McDonell), Bellamy Blake (Bob Morley), Octavia Blake (Marie Avgeropoulos), Jasper Jordan (Devon Bostick), Monty Green (Christopher Larkin), Raven Reyes (Lindsey Morgan), John Murphy (Richard Harmon), and Wells Jaha (Eli Goree). They are among the first people from a space habitat, the Ark, to return to Earth after a devastating nuclear apocalypse. Other lead characters include Dr. Abby Griffin (Paige Turco), Clarke's mother; Marcus Kane (Henry Ian Cusick), a council member on the Ark; and Thelonious Jaha (Isaiah Washington), the Chancellor of the Ark and Wells' father.

Synopsis

Ninety-seven years after a devastating nuclear apocalypse wipes out almost all life on Earth, thousands of people now live in a space station orbiting Earth, which they call the Ark. Three generations have been born in space, but when life-support systems on the Ark begin to fail, one hundred juvenile detainees are sent to Earth in a last attempt to determine whether it is habitable, or at least save resources for the remaining residents of the Ark. They discover that some survived the apocalypse: the grounders, who live in clans locked in a power struggle; the Reapers, another group of grounders who have been turned into cannibals by the Mountain Men; and the Mountain Men, who live in Mount Weather, descended from those who locked themselves away before the apocalypse. Under the leadership of Bellamy and Clarke, the juveniles attempt to survive the harsh surface conditions, battle hostile grounders and establish communication with the Ark.

In the second season, forty-eight of the remaining detainees are captured and taken to Mount Weather by the Mountain Men. The Mountain Men are transfusing blood from imprisoned grounders as an anti-radiation treatment as their bodies have not adapted to deal with the remaining radiation on Earth. Medical tests of the forty-eight show their bone marrow will allow the Mountain Men to survive outside containment, so the Mountain Men begin taking the youths' bone marrow. Meanwhile, the inhabitants of the Ark have crash-landed various stations on Earth and begin an alliance with the grounders to save both their people, naming the main settlement at Alpha Station "Camp Jaha". The season ends with the massacre of the Mountain Men to save the prisoners. During this time, former Chancellor Jaha leads a group in search of a fabled "City of Light." Jaha discovers an artificial intelligence named A.L.I.E. while John Murphy finds an alarming video implying a connection between the AI and the destruction of the world.

In the third season, Alpha Station renamed Arkadia, comes under new management when Pike, a former teacher, and mentor on the Ark, is elected as chancellor and begins a war with the grounders. Pike kills an encampment of grounder warriors while they sleep, which further damages their already fragile relationship with the grounders. Furthermore, the grounder leader Lexa is killed by her mentor during a failed assassination attempt on Clarke. A.L.I.E. who was commanded to make life better for mankind is revealed to have responded by solving the problem of human overpopulation by launching the nuclear apocalypse that devastated Earth, and begins to use ingestible computer chips to take control of peoples' minds. A.L.I.E. is ultimately destroyed by Clarke, but not before warning of an impending apocalyptic disaster.

In the fourth season, hundreds of nuclear reactors around the world are melting down due to decades of neglect that will result in the majority of the planet becoming uninhabitable. Clarke and the others search for ways to survive the coming wave of radiation. When it is discovered that the grounders with black blood – known as the Nightbloods – can metabolize radiation, Clarke and the others attempt to recreate the formula, but fail to test it. An old bunker is discovered that can protect 1,200 people for over five years from the new apocalypse; each of the twelve clans selects a hundred people to stay in the bunker. A small group decides to return to space and attempt to survive in the remnants of the Ark. Clarke, who is now a nightblood, remains on the Earth's surface alone.

In the fifth season, six years after the meltdown of the nuclear reactors, a prisoner transport ship arrives in the only green spot left on Earth, where Clarke and Madi, a Nightblood grounder who also survived the wave of radiation that swept the planet after the meltdown, have been living. Those who survived in space and in the bunker have returned safely on the ground. A struggle for the Shallow Valley between the prisoners and a new, united clan, known as Wonkru, begins, resulting in a battle ending with the valley being destroyed. The survivors escape to space and go into cryosleep while they wait for the Earth to recover. However, Monty discovers that Earth will apparently never recover and, before dying of old age, sets the prison ship on a course for a new world.

In the sixth season, after 125 years in cryosleep, Clarke, Bellamy, and the others wake up to find out that they are no longer orbiting Earth and have been brought to a new habitable world, Alpha, also known as Sanctum. After landing on this world, they discover a new society, led by ruling families known as the Primes. They also discover new dangers in this new world, and a mysterious rebel group, known as the Children of Gabriel as well as a mysterious Anomaly. Clarke falls victim to the Primes and ends up in a battle with one for control of her body, a fight which she ultimately wins. The season ends with the deaths of most of the Primes, but also with the loss of Abby Griffin and Marcus Kane. Throughout the season, Madi is haunted through the Flame AI by the spirit of the Dark Commander, an evil grounder leader that had ruled when Indra was a child. In order to save Madi, Raven is forced to destroy the Flame, but the Dark Commander escapes.

The seventh season finds the inhabitants of Sanctum trying to find a way to live together in peace following the aftermath of the events of the previous season while battling the resurrected Dark Commander. At the same time, Clarke and others come into conflict with the mysterious Disciples, humans from another world who are convinced that Clarke holds the key to winning a last war that is coming. The season also explores the mysterious Anomaly introduced in the sixth season, now identified as a wormhole linking six planets, one of them being a regenerated Earth, together. After vanishing and being believed dead for some time, Bellamy returns, but converts to the Disciple cause, ultimately leading to his death at Clarke's hands. At the end of the series, the Dark Commander is permanently killed by Indra and humanity achieves Transcendence aside from Clarke who committed murder during the test. Clarke returns to Earth where her surviving friends and Octavia's new boyfriend Levitt choose to join her for a peaceful new life, although Madi remains Transcended.

Cast and characters

 Eliza Taylor as Clarke Griffin
 Paige Turco as Abigail "Abby" Griffin (seasons 1–6; guest season 7)
 Thomas McDonell as Finn Collins (seasons 1–2)
 Eli Goree as Wells Jaha (season 1; guest season 2)
 Marie Avgeropoulos as Octavia Blake
 Bob Morley as Bellamy Blake
 Kelly Hu as Callie "Cece" Cartwig (season 1)
 Christopher Larkin as Monty Green (seasons 1–5; guest season 6)
 Devon Bostick as Jasper Jordan (seasons 1–4)
 Isaiah Washington as Thelonious Jaha (seasons 1–5)
 Henry Ian Cusick as Marcus Kane (seasons 1–6)
 Lindsey Morgan as Raven Reyes (seasons 2–7; recurring season 1)
 Ricky Whittle as Lincoln (seasons 2–3; recurring season 1)
 Richard Harmon as John Murphy (seasons 3–7; recurring seasons 1–2)
 Zach McGowan as Roan (season 4; recurring season 3; guest season 7)
 Tasya Teles as Echo / Ash (seasons 5–7; guest seasons 2–3; recurring season 4)
 Shannon Kook as Jordan Green (seasons 6–7; guest season 5)
 JR Bourne as Russell Lightbourne / Malachi / Sheidheda (season 7; recurring season 6)
 Chuku Modu as Gabriel Santiago (season 7; recurring season 6)
 Shelby Flannery as Hope Diyoza (season 7; guest season 6)