The 100 (pronounced The Hundred) is an American post-apocalyptic science fiction drama television series that premiered on March 19, 2014, on The CW. The series, developed by Jason Rothenberg, is loosely based on the novel series of the same name by Kass Morgan.

The series follows a group of post-apocalyptic survivors, chiefly a group of criminal adolescents, including Clarke Griffin (Eliza Taylor), Finn Collins (Thomas McDonell), Bellamy Blake (Bob Morley), Octavia Blake (Marie Avgeropoulos), Jasper Jordan (Devon Bostick), Monty Green (Christopher Larkin), Raven Reyes (Lindsey Morgan), John Murphy (Richard Harmon), and Wells Jaha (Eli Goree). They are among the first people from a space habitat, the Ark, to return to Earth after a devastating nuclear apocalypse. Other lead characters include Dr. Abby Griffin (Paige Turco), Clarke's mother; Marcus Kane (Henry Ian Cusick), a council member on the Ark; and Thelonious Jaha (Isaiah Washington), the Chancellor of the Ark and Wells's father.

In April 2019, the series was renewed for a seventh season, which will consist of 16 episodes. In August 2019, it was announced that the series will conclude with the seventh season.

Synopsis
The setting is 97 years after a devastating nuclear apocalypse wipes out almost all life on Earth. Thousands of people live in a space station orbiting Earth, which they call the Ark, constructed of connecting space stations and spacecraft. Three generations have been born in space, bringing the population of the Ark beyond carrying capacity. The future is jeopardized by over-population. 100 juvenile detainees are sent to Earth in a last attempt to determine whether it is habitable. They discover that some survived the apocalypse: the Grounders, who live in clans locked in a power struggle; the Reapers, another group of Grounders who have been turned into cannibals by the Mountain Men; and the Mountain Men, who live in Mount Weather, descended from those who locked themselves away before the apocalypse. Under the leadership of Bellamy and Clarke, the 100 attempt to survive the harsh surface conditions, battle hostile Grounders and establish communication with the Ark.

In the second season, 48 of the remaining 100 are captured and taken to Mount Weather by the Mountain Men. It is eventually revealed that the Mountain Men are transfusing blood from imprisoned Grounders as an anti-radiation treatment as their bodies have not adapted to deal with the remaining radiation on Earth. Medical tests of the 100 show an even more potent anti-radiation efficacy: their bone marrow will allow the Mountain Men to survive outside containment. The inhabitants of the Ark have crash-landed various stations on Earth and begun an alliance with the Grounders to save groups of people, naming the main settlement at Alpha Station "Camp Jaha".

In the third season, Alpha Station renamed Arkadia, comes under new management when Pike, a former teacher, and mentor on the Ark, is elected as chancellor and begins a war with the Grounders. Pike uses very dangerous methods, which further damages their already fragile relationship with the grounders. An artificial intelligence named A.L.I.E. who was commanded to make life better for mankind is revealed to have responded by solving the problem of human overpopulation by launching the nuclear apocalypse that devastated Earth. The AI takes over the minds of nearly everyone in Arkadia and Polis, the capital city of the Grounders. In the season three finale, Clarke manages to destroy A.L.I.E.

In the fourth season, hundreds of nuclear reactors around the world are melting down due to decades of neglect that will result in 96 percent of the planet becoming uninhabitable. Clarke and the others search for ways to survive the coming wave of radiation. When it is discovered that the Grounders with black blood, known as the Nightbloods – can metabolize radiation, Clarke and the others attempt to recreate the formula, but fail to test it. An old bunker is discovered that can protect 1,200 people for over 5 years from the new apocalypse; each of the twelve clans selects a hundred people to stay in the bunker. A small group decides to return to space and attempt to survive in the remnants of the Ark. However, Clarke, who is now a nightblood remained on the Earth's surface alone.

In the fifth season, six years after the meltdown of the nuclear reactors, a prisoner transport ship arrives in the only green spot left on Earth, where Clarke and Madi, a Nightblood Grounder who also survived the wave of radiation that swept the planet after the meltdown, have been living. Those who survived in space and in the bunker have returned safely on the ground. A struggle for the Shallow Valley between the prisoners and a new, united clan, known as Wonkru, begins, resulting in a battle ending with the valley being destroyed. The survivors escape to space and go into cryosleep while they wait for the Earth to recover.

In the sixth season, after 125 years in cryosleep, Clarke, Bellamy, and the others wake up to find out that they are no longer orbiting Earth and have been brought to a new habitable world, Alpha, also known as Sanctum. After landing on this world, they discover a new society, led by ruling families known as the Primes. However, they also discover new dangers in this new world, and a mysterious rebel group, known as the Children of Gabriel.

Cast and characters

 Eliza Taylor as Clarke Griffin
 Paige Turco as Abigail "Abby" Griffin (seasons 1–6)
 Thomas McDonell as Finn Collins (seasons 1–2)
 Eli Goree as Wells Jaha (season 1; guest season 2)
 Marie Avgeropoulos as Octavia Blake
 Bob Morley as Bellamy Blake
 Kelly Hu as Callie "Cece" Cartwig (season 1)
 Christopher Larkin as Monty Green (seasons 1–5; guest season 6)
 Devon Bostick as Jasper Jordan (seasons 1–4)
 Isaiah Washington as Thelonious Jaha (seasons 1–5)
 Henry Ian Cusick as Marcus Kane (seasons 1–6)
 Lindsey Morgan as Raven Reyes (season 2–present; recurring season 1)
 Ricky Whittle as Lincoln (seasons 2–3; recurring season 1)
 Richard Harmon as John Murphy (season 3–present; recurring seasons 1–2)
 Zach McGowan as Roan (season 4; recurring season 3)
 Tasya Teles as Echo (season 5–present; recurring season 4; guest seasons 2–3)
 Shannon Kook as Jordan Green (season 6–present; guest season 5)