"Full Stop" (Chinese: 句号; pinyin: Jùhào) is a song written and recorded by Chinese–Hong Kong singer-songwriter G.E.M. for her seventh studio album City Zoo (2019). G.E.M. produced the song with Terrence Ma, and it was released on November 22, 2019, by Sony Music Taiwan as the lead single from the album. "Full Stop" is a pop number with a retro-styled musical motif, with lyrics discussing the drama surrounding the relationship with her previous record label, Hummingbird Music Limited.

Commercially, "Full Stop" peaked at number one on the TME Uni Chart in China and number nine on the Singapore Regional chart. The accompanying music video for "Full Stop" was directed by Birdy Nio as was uploaded to the singer's YouTube channel alongside the release of the track. The video was shot in a forest, a prairie, and a beach. 

Background and composition
G.E.M. reviewed the 12-year career with the song "Full Stop". She once learned a blank piece of paper. Some things that can't be conceded and tolerant to others are cruel to herself. She also hopes to use songs to encourage all those who stand at the crossroads of life and are confused about the future. Those who are in the middle of the authorities are confused and look up at the vast sky. No matter how hard the front is, it is right to face the challenge. It is not so difficult to draw a "full stop". The representative animal of this song is hummingbird.

Music video
The music video was released on YouTube on November 22, 2019, the same day of the single released. The music video was directed by Birdy Nio. The music hair style of the music video was using her previous albums', "18...", "My Secret" and "All About U" hair style. The music video earned a million views on the first day of released. It earned 2 million views on the following day. As of June 2020, the music video has gained over 28 million views.

Credits and personnel
 G.E.M. – vocals, songwriter, producer
 Terrence Ma – producer
 Richard Furch – mixer, producer

 Charts 
+ Chart performance for "Full Stop" Chart (2019) Peakposition China (TME UNI Chart) 1 Singapore Regional (RIAS)* 9

Release history
CountryDateFormatLabelVariousNovember 22, 2019 Sony Music Taiwan 