"Full Stop" is a song written and recorded by Hong Kong singer-songwriter G.E.M. for her seventh studio City Zoo (2019). G.E.M. produced the song with Terrence Ma, and it was released on November 22, 2019, by Music Entertainment Taiwan Ltd. as the lead single from the album. "Full Stop" is a Mandopop genre song. Over a retro-styled musical motif, G.E.M. sings lyrics about devotion to the drama of her previous record company,  Hummingbird Music Limited.

The music video for "Full Stop" was directed by Birdy Nio. The video was published on November 22, 2019, the video is set in the forest and green land, and shows the drama of G.E.M. and her previous company. The song was peaked at number 1 at the KKBOX Taiwan and Hong Kong daily and weekly new song and single chart.

Background and composition
G.E.M. reviewed the 12-year career with the song "Full Stop". She once learned a blank piece of paper. Some things that can't be conceded and tolerant to others are cruel to herself. She also hopes to use songs to encourage all those who stand at the crossroads of life and are confused about the future. Those who are in the middle of the authorities are confused and look up at the vast sky. No matter how hard the front is, it is right to face the challenge. It is not so difficult to draw a "full stop". The representative animal of this song is hummingbird.

Commercial performance
"Full Stop" was debuted at number 2 on the KKBOX Hong Kong Chinese Single Daily Chart. Later, it peaked and charted at number 1 for eight days. Besides that, the song was peaked at number 1 for 25 days on the KKBOX Hong Kong Chinese New Song Daily Chart. At the same time, the song was peaked at number 1 for three consecutive weeks at the KKBOX Hong Kong Chinese New Song Weekly Chart and two consecutive weeks at the KKBOX Hong Kong Chinese Singles Weekly Chart.

In Taiwan, "Full Stop" was debuted at number 3 on the KKBOX Taiwan Chinese New Song Daily Chart. It was also debuted at number 8 on the on the KKBOX Taiwan Chinese Single Daily Chart. Later, the song was peaked at number 1 on two of the charts for 25 consecutive days. At the same time, the song was peaked at number 1 for three consecutive weeks at the KKBOX Taiwan Chinese New Song Weekly Chart and the KKBOX Hong Kong Chinese Singles Weekly Chart.

Music video
The music video was released on YouTube on November 22, 2019 the same day of the single released. The music video was directed by Birdy Nio. The music hair style of the music video was using her previous albums', "18...", "My Secret" and "All About U" hair style. The music video earned a million views on the first day of released. It earned 2 million views on the following day.

Credits and personnel
 G.E.M. – vocals, songwriter, producer
 Terrence Ma – producer
 Richard Furch – mixer, producer

Charts

Daily charts
 Chart (2019) Peakposition KKBOX Hong Kong Chinese Singles Daily Chart * 1 KKBOX Hong Kong Chinese New Song Daily Chart * 1 KKBOX Taiwan Chinese Singles Daily Chart * 1 KKBOX Taiwan Chinese New Song Daily Chart * 1

Weekly charts
 Chart (2019) Peakposition KKBOX Hong Kong Chinese Singles Weekly Chart * 1 KKBOX Hong Kong Chinese New Song Weekly Chart * 1 KKBOX Taiwan Chinese Singles Weekly Chart * 1 KKBOX Taiwan Chinese New Song Weekly Chart * 1 