Sourcegraph is a semantic code-search service designed to enhance collaborative coding. Sourcegraph semantically indexes all the open source code available on the web and allows browse quick and efficient code library browsing. Sourcegraph provides free code search tool for open source developers, through web browser, via editor plug-ins and in its own editor. It allows searching all open-source code available on the web by repository, package, or function and displays a fully linked code to access definitions, read the documentations, and find usage examples instantly.

Sourcegraph is composed of a local editor and a server that It integrates with multiple code hosts, editors, and code review tools. The local editor is based on Visual Studio Code. It is in a private beta, with an open source public beta expected. But the search engine is designed to work with any text editor or IDE. The editor allows developer to search and review repositories of local and remote code as well as writing and editing a local code that will not touch the server, while the server provided advanced code search for companies. The server can display who is using a particular lines of code and where it is deployed. It is designed to allow developers to check if someone is already fixing a bug or working on a feature. Sourcegraph CEO explains that it allow developers to better understand how the development has progressed by "getting everyone on the same page". Sourcegraph’s goal is to immerse developers into a more real-time experience, which keeps them up to date and working on the most important things they need to develop.

Sourcegraph was co-founded by stanford graduates Quinn Slack, CEO, and Beyang Liu, CTO in line with their effort to build tools that can help them better read and understand poorly documented open-source code. It achieved 300,000 direct product users until Jan 30, 2017. and raised $20 million on october 2017 via Scott Raney of Redpoint Ventures, and Dan Friedland of Goldcrest Capital who joined the board of directors.

Sourcegraph currently supports Java, Go, and Python, with JavaScript, Ruby, and Haskell in beta.