AI for Good is an ongoing webinar series organized by the Standardization Bureau (ITU-T) of the International Telecommunication Union, where AI innovators and problem owners learn, discuss and connect to identify AI solutions to advance the Sustainable Development Goals. The impetus for organizing global summits that are action oriented, came from existing discourse in artificial intelligence (AI) research being dominated by research streams such as the Netflix Prize (improve the movie recommendation algorithm). 

AI for Good aims to bring forward Artificial Intelligence research topics that contribute towards more global problems, in particular through the Sustainable Development Goals. 

AI for Good came out of the AI for Good Global Summit 2020 which had been moved online in 2020 due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. AI for Good is organized by the Standardization Sector of the ITU (ITU-T). Since moving online, AI for Good developed into three main program streams: Learn, Build, and Connect. AI for Good also helps organize ITU's Global Standards Symposium.

2023

The 2023 events received some publicity due to the large gathering of humanoid robots that occurred, including Ai-Da, Nadine Social Robot, Geminoid, and Sophia.

Neural Network 
In 2020 the Global Summit became an online-only event. In 2022, the summit moved to the "Neural Network" community platform. Speakers include: 

 Muhammad Yunus
 Shwetak Patel
 Yoshua Bengio
 Peter Heine Nielsen
 Reeps One
 Anousheh Ansari
 Riane Eisler
 Kai-Fu Lee Regina Barzilay
 Thomas Wiegand
 Stephen Ibaraki
 Nuria Oliver
 Barbara Pernici
 Taryn Southern
 Thomas G. Dietterich Simon Pierro
 Gabriele Kotsis
 Emmanuel Faber
 Mikko Hyppönen
 Francesca Rossi
 Davar Ardalan
 Iker Casillas Missy Cummings
 Jaan Tallinn
 Anja Kaspersen
 Caroline Criado-Perez
 Stuart J. Russell
 Chaesub Lee
 Peter Diamandis
 Simao Campos

 Global Summit 2019 
The third AI for Good Global Summit took place from 28 May to 31 May, and gave rise to the ITU Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Autonomous and Assisted Driving with several Day 0 workshops and VIP events having taken place on May 27. Some of the speakers included:

Ray Kurzweil
Cedric Villani
Yoshua Bengio
Anousheh Ansari
Yves Daccord
Vladimir Kramnik
Jim Hagemann SnabeKlaus-Robert Müller
Jean-Philippe Courtois
Amir Ansari
Francis Gury
Petteri Taalas
Houlin ZhaoSoumya Swaminathan
Eileen Donahoe
Vicki Hanson
Francesca Rossi
Ingmar Weber
Jean-Philippe Courtois

 Global Summit 2018 
World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom (right) and ITU Secretary-General Houlin Zhao (center) 
The second AI for Good Global Summit took place from 15 to 17 May 2018 at the ITU headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland and generated 35 AI project proposals Speakers included:

 Roger Penrose
 Samantha Cristoforetti
 António Guterres
 Michael Møller
 Wendell Wallach
 Aimee Van Wynsberghe Tedros Adhanom
 Mukhisa Kituyi
 Bill Peduto
 Stuart J. Russell
 Thomas Wiegand
 Timnit Gebru Huw Price
 Stephen Kelly
 H.E. Ahmed Al Theneyan
 U.N. Envoy on Youth Jayathma Wickramanayake
 Ingmar Weber
Lui Yang

 Global Summit 2017 
Fei-Fei Li speaking at AI for Good 2017

The first AI for Good Global summit took place from 7 to 9 June 2017. Speakers at the event included:

 Pedro Domingos
 Fei-Fei Li
 Gary Marcus
 Stuart J. Russell Jürgen Schmidhuber
 António Guterres
 Rupert Stadler
 Manuela M. Veloso Peter Norvig
 Christopher Fabian
Peter Lee

One of the outcomes of the 2017 Global Summit was the creation of an ITU-T Focus Group on Machine Learning for 5G.

 Outcomes 

 Machine Learning 5G 
The ITU-T Focus Group on Machine Learning for 5G Networks (FG-ML5G) was created following discussions at the 2017 AI for Good Global Summit. The FG-ML5G is produced several technology standards in this domain, including Y.3172, Y.3173, Y.3176, which were adopted by ITU-T Study Group 13. The FG-ML5G created the impetus for a new ITU-T Focus Group on Autonomous Networks, which is responsible for i.a. Y.3181.

 AI for Health 
The 2018 Global Summit led to the creation of the ITU-WHO Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Health with the World Health Organization, which created the AI for Health Framework.

 Trustworthy AI 
Together with ITU-T Study Group 16 and 17, AI for Good has been developing technology specifications under Trustworthy AI. Including items on homomorphic encryption, secure multi-party computation, and federated learning.

 ITU Journal "ICT Discoveries" 
The ITU relaunched its Journal ICT Discoveries during the 2018 Global Summit, with the first edition being a special on Artificial Intelligence.