David Lee Hicks (born 1963) is an American Anglican bishop. He was bishop coadjutor in the Diocese of the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic of the Reformed Episcopal Church, from 2005-2008 and has served as bishop ordinary since 2008. He has been also a bishop of the Anglican Church in North America, since the Reformed Episcopal Church was one of the founding bodies that joined at its inception, in 2009. He also serves as president and chancellor of the Reformed Episcopal Seminary as well as on various other committees.

Personal life
Hicks is married to Lisa Hicks.  They have three grown children.http://www.ad-ne.org/events/synod-2015/

Education
Alma Mater – Pennsville Christian Academy, Pennsville, New Jersey
Bachelor of Biblical Studies [BBS] – Valley Forge Christian College, Phoenixville, PA  (1984)
Master's in Arts of Religion – Biblical Studies [MAR – Biblical Studies] – Westminster Theological Seminary, Philadelphia, PA (1986)
Master of Sacred Theology – New Testament [STM] – Lutheran Theological Seminary, Philadelphia, PA (1999) 
Doctor of Philosophy – Hermeneutics [Ph.D.] – Westminster Theological Seminary  (2016)
Doctor of Divinity [D.D.] (honorary) – Theological Commission of the Reformed Episcopal Church Sommerville, South Carolina (2008)
Additional studies: Institute of Holy Land Studies: Jerusalem, Israel (1986) AND Widener University School of Law (1990).David L. Hicks, Professional and Educational Resumé, Reformed Episcopal Seminary Archive Files, (Blue Bell, PA: Reformed Episcopal Seminary)

 Early life and ministry 
Hicks was born in Salem, New Jersey and was baptised at Salem United Presbyterian Church. "He was raised in a Christian family, and from the that he could read, he evidenced a deep love of the Scriptures" where he "dedicated himself" studying Scriptures in their original languages seeking to teach at either Bible College or a Seminary.http://www.ad-ne.org/events/synod-2015/  In 1986, G. P. Mellick Belshaw, Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese (PECUSA; now TEC) confirmed Hicks at Trinity Episcopal Church located in Swedesboro, New Jersey. Hicks joined the Reformed Episcopal Church in 1990, joining Providence Chapel Reformed Episcopal Church in Mount Laurel, New Jersey. He was ordained as a deacon by Bishop Leonard W. Riches at Saint Paul's Reformed Episcopal, in Oreland, Pennsylvania. In 1994, Hicks was ordained as a Priest at Christ Reformed Episcopal Church, in Swedesboro, NJ. Hicks served as the Vicar and then Rector of Christ Church for four years.David L. Hicks, Curriculum Vitæ 1, Reformed Episcopal Seminary Archive Files, (Blue Bell, PA: Reformed Episcopal Seminary)

During the time that spanned Hicks's confirmation, to him serving as vicar and then rector of Christ Church; he also a legislative aide to New Jersey Assemblyman Jack Collins, Speaker of the New Jersey General Assembly. While working in politics as a legislative aide, Hicks was able to "strengthen administrative and personnel skills, which [would become a] tremendous use to him at a later point in life."http://www.ad-ne.org/events/synod-2015/  Life changed for Bishop Hicks, though, in 1995, when he became Rector of Saint Paul's, Oreland, PA, where he served for ten years.David L. Hicks, Curriculum Vitæ 1, Reformed Episcopal Seminary Archive Files, (Blue Bell, PA: Reformed Episcopal Seminary)David L. Hicks, Professional and Educational Resumé, Reformed Episcopal Seminary Archive Files, (Blue Bell, PA: Reformed Episcopal Seminary)  While serving at Saint Paul's Oreland he became canon to the Bishop Ordinary, Leonard W. Riches in 2000. In 2005, Hicks, was elected by the Diocese of the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic to be Leonard W. Riches’ Bishop Coadjutor. Hicks became a member of the College of Bishops for the Anglican Church in North America; in 2008 he became the Bishop Ordinary of the Diocese of the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic.http://www.ad-ne.org/events/synod-2015/

 Teaching career 
Hicks has taught philosophy at Camden County College.David L. Hicks, Curriculum Vitæ 1, Reformed Episcopal Seminary Archive Files, (Blue Bell, PA: Reformed Episcopal Seminary) He has taught Greek Elements; Greek Exegesis at Reformed Seminary since 1996; in addition with been Associate professor of Biblical Languages and Literature since 2005. He also teaches Hermeneutics; Book of Common Prayer; and other areas. He became the Chancellor of the Reformed Episcopal Seminary in 2008 and is currently serving in that office as well as serving as President since May 2009.David L. Hicks, Curriculum Vitæ 2, Reformed Episcopal Seminary Archive Files, (Blue Bell, PA: Reformed Episcopal Seminary)David L. Hicks, Professional and Educational Resumé, Reformed Episcopal Seminary Archive Files, (Blue Bell, PA: Reformed Episcopal Seminary)

Committee work
He has served on the following committees:
Chairman of the Diocesan, Diocese of the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic, Nominations Committee
Standing Committee for the Diocese of the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic
Board of Examining Chaplains for the Diocese of the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic 
The Evangelism, Church Growth, and Development Committee for the Diocese of the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic 
The Bassinger Home Fund Committee
Spiritual Growth and Nurture Committee
Denominational Interchurch Relations Committee
Nominations Committee
Standing Liturgical Commission
Prayer Book and Common Liturgy Task Force for the Anglican Church in North America
 Holy Orders Task Force for the Anglican Church in North Americahttp://www.ad-ne.org/events/synod-2015/

Published works
Hicks's doctoral dissertation is published and on file at the library at the Reformed Episcopal Seminary.