Cezary Wodziński (27 May 1959 – 12 June 2016) was a Polish philosopher, historian of philosophy, essayist, translator, and writer. He was a lecturer at Jagiellonian University in Cracow (Poland) and at the University of Warsaw (Poland).

 Biography 

 Life 
Cezary Wodziński, the son of Zygmunt Wodziński (an engineer) and Michalina Wodzińska (teacher), was born in rural Lębork, Poland. He attended Tadeusz Reytan's High School in Warsaw. Among his classmates were Filip Łobodziński, journalist and translator, and Andrzej Sosnowski, poet. Following high school graduation, he took a job at Psychoneurological Institute of Warsaw as a paramedic. Aside from this, he also enrolled to Mountain Rescue, GOPR (Grupa Beskidzka - Bieszczady).

In 1979 he started studying philosophy at the University of Warsaw. During his studies, he was an author of many philosophical publications. He defended his dissertation in 1985 with a thesis: "The dispute about the limits of rationality. Szestow – Husserl”, which was a degree of honors. 
In 1986, he worked first at the Institute of Philosophy and Sociology of PAN (National Academy of Sciences) in the Department of Contemporary Philosophy, headed by prof. Barbara Skarga, followed by prof. Stanisław Borzym. In 1996 he started an independent research lab. In 1989 he defended his doctorate. PhD thesis was "Knowledge and salvation. Study of Lev Shestov's thoughts. Supervisor of his PhD thesis was prof. B. Skarga, and reviewers: Professor. R. Łużny, prof. K. Pomian.
He habiltated in 1994. Habilitation thesis was "Heidegger and the problem of evil". Among reviewers were prof. K. Michalski, prof. B. Skarga and prof. J. Tischner. The habilitation was awarded with T. Kotarbinski prize and Prime Minister prize. In 1999 he eventually obtained the title of professor of the humanities. In the end of 90s' he was an editor in chief of philosophical magazines as following: „Aletheia” i „Biblioteki Aletheia”. As a result of his outstanding performance, he was awarded an academic scholarships i.a. in Paris, Vienna and Fryburg. Wodziński lectured in Stockholm and Moscow. In 2001 he obtained the title of professor ordinarius at Jagiellonian University of Cracow.

 Work 
Russian philosophy and theology, German philosophy, religious philosophy, phenomenology, hermeneutics, philosophy of dialogue, transcendental philosophy, philosophy of language, philosophy of existence, metaphysics, ontology, axiology were topics of his particular interest.
In his scientific achievements were: fifteen publications, more than eighty discourses, papers and essays of philosophy issues. He was twice awarded I prize of STP (Stowarzyszenie Tłumaczy Polskich - Polish Translators Association) in the field of philosophical translation. He was a member of Collegium Invisibile.

To the most significant publications belong:
Wiedza i zbawienie. Studium myśli Lwa Szestowa, Warszawa 1991
I cóż po filozofie… Eseje filozoficzne, Warszawa 1992
Filozofia jako sztuka myślenia. Zachęta dla licealistów, Warszawa 1993
Heidegger i problem zła, Warszawa 1994
Hermes i Eros. Eseje drugie, Warszawa 1997
Wielkie Wędrowanie, Warszawa 1998
Światłocienie zła, Warszawa 1998
Pan Sokrates. Eseje trzecie, Warszawa 2000
Św. Idiota. Projekt antropologii apofatycznej, Gdańsk 2000
Filozofia jako sztuka myślenia, Warszawa 2000 (2 wyd. rozszerzone)
Swietijat idiot. Projekt za apofaticzna antropołogija, Sofija 2004
Trans, Dostojewski, Rosja, czyli o filozofowaniu siekierą, Gdańsk 2005
Nic po ironii. Eseje czwarte, Warszawa 2006
Między anegdotą a doświadczeniem, Gdańsk 2007
Heidegger i problem zła, Gdańsk 2007 (2 wyd.)
Logo nieśmiertelności. Platona przypisy do Sokratesa, Gdańsk 2008