This list of student awards is an index to articles that describe notable awards given to students.

General

Country  Award  Sponsor  DescriptionInternationalRIBA President's MedalsRoyal Institute of British ArchitectsEstablished in 1836 when the first RIBA Silver Medal was awarded, these are widely regarded as the most prestigious awards in architectural education in the world. United States  ACM Student Research Competition  Association for Computing Machinery  Slide presentation at ACM conference. Undergraduate and graduate categories based on knowledge, contribution, and quality of presentation United StatesBridge Medal  San Francisco Public Schools  Silver medal that was awarded to the top male graduates of San Francisco grammar schools. Sister prize to the Denman Medal. Awarded from 1879 to 1915. United StatesDenman Medal  San Francisco Public Schools  Silver medal that was awarded to the top graduates of the all-female Denman Grammar School. Sister prize to the Bridge Medal. Awarded from 1865 to 1915. United States, Canada   Advanced Placement Awards  College Board  Students who have performed exceptionally well on AP examinations  Australia  Australian Student Prize  Government of Australia  National recognition to academic excellence and achievement in secondary education The prize is no longer awarded as of 2015. Australia  Beazley Medal  School Curriculum and Standards Authority  Top Tertiary Entrance Exam student and top vocational education and training (VET) student Mongolia  Best Student of Mongolia award   Ministry of Education Culture and Science of Mongolia etc.  Best Student of the yearMOF in MongolianMNB in Mongolian United Kingdom  Carpenter Medal  University of London  Thesis of exceptional distinction in statistical, genetic, comparative or experimental psychology United Kingdom  Curriers' Company London History Essay Prize  Worshipful Company of Curriers  Postgraduate essay prize on the history of Londonhttps://www.history.ac.uk/join-ihr/fellowships/awards-bursaries-and-prizes/curriers-company-london-history-essay-prize www.history.ac.uk Canada  CHL Scholastic Player of the Year  Canadian Hockey League  Canadian Hockey League player who best combines success on the ice with success in school United States and Canada  Critics and Awards Program for High School Students  local schools  For high school theater and journalism students and teenage playwrights. Reviews that are later published by area newspapersAdam Campbell and Victoria Hays, "How the Cappies Got Started: An Interview with a Co-Founder". Accessed at 07:40 UTC, January 31, 2006. 
 The New York Times, "Theater Students Get Their Share of the Limelight", The New York Times, June 23, 2002. Late Edition - Final. Section 1. United Kingdom  Guardian Student Media Award  The Guardian  Best student articles in various categories Hong Kong  Hong Kong Outstanding Students Awards  Youth Arch Foundation  About ten secondary school students from local and international schools in Hong Kong  United States  Hotchkiss Scholar  Lake Forest Graduate School of Management  Outstanding academic achievement and demonstrated commitment to the spirit of excellence Japan  Japan Academy Prize (academics)  Japan Academy  Academic theses, books, and achievements United States  Machtey Award  Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science  Author(s) of the best student paper(s) United States  Miriam Braverman Memorial Prize  Progressive Librarians Guild  Best graduate student paper about some aspect of the social responsibilities of librarians, libraries, or librarianship United States  Morgan Prize  American Mathematical Society et al.   Undergraduate student in the US, Canada, or Mexico who demonstrates superior mathematics research United States  National Pacemaker Awards  National Scholastic Press Association, Associated Collegiate Press  Excellence in American student journalism United Kingdom  National Student Journalism Awards  National Union of Students  Students send their best three articles from the past academic year to be critiqued by a panel of senior national journalists.Journalism jobs and news from Holdthefrontpage.co.ukStudent Journalist 'Oscars' - Mirror.Co.UkJournalism Training Video Skills Ireland  National Student Media Awards   Oxygen.ie website  Annual All-Ireland student journalism competition The awards have been labelled "Ireland's premier student awards". United States  NCAA Sportsmanship Award  National Collegiate Athletic Association  Men and women in the NCAA who have demonstrated one or more of the ideals of sportsmanship, including fairness, civility, honesty, respect and responsibility. United States  Wayne B. Nottingham Prize  Physical Electronics Conference  Best student paper United States  Presidential Scholars Program  United States Department of Education  Graduating seniors for their accomplishments in academic success, leadership, and service to school and communityref></ref>  Prudential Spirit of Community Award  Royal College, Colombo#Awards  Samuel Goldwyn Writing Awards  The Science, Engineering & Technology Student of the Year Awards  Selma Jeanne Cohen Award  Silver Anniversary Awards  South Australian Scholarship  Student Academy Awards  Student Peace Prize  Student Peace Prize Secretariat  Sub auspiciis Praesidentis  SUNY Chancellor's Award for Student Excellence  The Undergraduate Awards  Van Amringe Mathematical Prize  William C. Carter Award  Young American Award

University of Cambridge

University of Oxford
The University of Oxford is a collegiate research university in the city of Oxford, England, the oldest university in the English-speaking world.
 Award  Named for  Description Boden Scholarship  Lt-Col. Joseph Boden (1763–1811)  For the encouragement of the study of, and proficiency in, the Sanskrit Language and Literature  Bodley Medal  Thomas Bodley  (1545–1613)  Outstanding contributions ... to the worlds of communications and literature Clarendon Fund  Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon (1609–1674)  University graduates from around the world and from across all subject areas, who demonstrate academic excellence and potential Conington Prize  John Conington (1825–1869)  Cash prize for a dissertation on ancient history, religion, art, and archaeology, or ancient philosophy and ideas, or classical literature, textual criticism, and philology Eldon Law Scholarship  John Scott, 1st Earl of Eldon (1751–1838)  Students from the University of Oxford who wish to study for the English Bar Gaisford Prize  Thomas Gaisford (1779–1855)  For classical Greek verse and proseUrban, Sylvanus, The Gentleman's Magazine, Vol. XLIV (July to December 1855) page 100 online at books.google.co.uk, accessed 14 August 2008 Henry Fellowship  Sir Charles Henry (1860–1919)  Two post-graduate students from any British university are funded to study in the US (one at Harvard and one at Yale), and two American post-graduate students from Harvard and Yale are funded to study at Cambridge and Oxford. Hetherington Prize  Mark G. Hetherington  Best doctoral thesis presentation in the Department of Materials Humanitas Programme   Visiting professorships at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge to address major themes in the arts, social sciences, and humanities Jardine Scholarship  Jardine Matheson  Develop future leaders, who would give back to the societies in which [Jardine Matheson] operates Neda Agha-Soltan Graduate Scholarship  Neda Agha-Soltan (1983–2009)  Post-graduate philosophy students at The Queen's College, Oxford, with preference given to students of Iranian citizenship or heritage Newdigate Prize  Sir Roger Newdigate (1719–1806)  Best composition in English verse by an undergraduate Norway Scholarship    Awarded in Norway. Norway Scholars receive funding for one or two years of study and research at Oxford. Oxford-Weidenfeld Translation Prize  George, Baron Weidenfeld (1919–2016)  Any book-length translation into English from any other living European language Rhodes Scholarship  Cecil Rhodes (1853–1902)  International postgraduate award for students to study at the University of Oxford Snell Exhibition  Sir John Snell (1629–1679)  Students of the University of Glasgow to allow them to undertake postgraduate study at Balliol College, Oxford Stanhope essay prize  Philip, 5th Earl Stanhope (1805–1875)  Undergraduate history essay prize created at Balliol College Vinerian Scholarship  Charles Viner (1678–1756)   To the University of Oxford student who gives the best performance in the examination for the degree of Bachelor of Civil Law Weldon Memorial Prize  Raphael Weldon (1860–1906)  To the person who has published the most noteworthy contribution to the development of mathematical or statistical methods applied to problems in Biology Zaharoff Travelling Scholarship  Sir Basil Zaharoff (1849–1936)  Prize for Oxford Modern Languages graduates in French