Libby Heaney is a British artist and quantum physicist known for her pioneering work on AI and quantum computing. She works on the impact of future technologies and is widely known as the first artist to use quantum computing as a functioning artistic medium. Her work has been featured internationally, including in the Victoria and Albert Museum, Tate Modern and the Science Gallery. She is currently a resident of Somerset House Studios. 

 Early life and scientific career 
Heaney is from Tamworth, Staffordshire. She studied physics at Imperial College London, graduating in 2005 with first class honours. Libby pursued a successful career in quantum physics, completing a PhD thesis on mode entanglement in ultra-cold atomic gases at the University of Leeds, and becoming an Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Postdoctoral Fellow at the University of Oxford to pursue her own research. In 2008, Heaney was awarded the Institute of Physics Very Early Career Woman in Physics Award (now Jocelyn Bell Burnell Medal and Prize).

 Artistic career 
In 2013 Heaney returned to the UK and completed a master's degree at the University of the Arts London. She studied arts and science at Central Saint Martins and graduated in 2015. She then became a lecturer at the Royal College of Art, teaching Information Experience Design. In 2016, she created Tinderbot which presented Tinder conversations between real users and AI bots programmed using Lady Chatterley's Lover. Tinderbot was covered by BBC News, TheJournal.ie and the Irish Examiner and was exhibited at The Lowry in 2018. In 2017, Heaney was commissionned by Sky Arts and the Barbican Centre to design Britbot, an internet bot built using artificial intelligence and the citizenship book Life in the UK: a guide for new residents.  The book, a manual for the citizenship test, has been described by Heaney as being "largely a white male privileged version of British history and culture". The bot created a test for the public, learnt from their responses and assesses how British they are.  She was awarded an Arts Council England grant to widen participation of the Britbot to social media. Heaney has exhibited her chatterbots at the Victoria and Albert Museum. She has created quantum physics inspired artwork for Science Gallery, the Victoria and Albert Museum and Light Art Space (LAS) in Berlin.

 Major works 

 Ent- and The Evolution of Ent-: QX (2022) 
In 2022, Libby Heaney was commissioned by Light Art Space to create Ent-, a 360 immersive installation that revisits Bosch’s Garden of Earthly Delights through quantum. The work uses quantum computing as both a medium and a paradigm through which to conceive human and non-human relations. 

Ent- was exhibited at LAS, Ars Electronica, and arebyte gallery in London. The work was also modified to fit a full dome projection at the Deutsches Museum in Munich, projected onto a public facade in Seoul, and turned into a playable version for an exhibition at Nahmad Contemporary in New York. 

In 2022, Ent- won the Lumen Prize immersive environment award. 

The Evolution of Ent-:QX, first displayed at arebyte gallery in London, builds on Ent- and imagines a fictional quantum computing company (QX) that appropriates, parodies and subverts the language of big tech in order to educate the viewer on current profit-oriented uses of quantum computing as well as propose new ways to think about and use the technology. 

 SlimeQore (2022) 
SlimeQore is a performative lecture accompanied by an immersive video montage, first performed at the Zabludowicz Collection in 2022. It uses slime as a metaphor for quantum particles and for the slimy world of big tech. Throughout the performance, Libby invites the audience to play with slime in order to understand the fluid nature of quantum physics and its implications. 

 Selected exhibitions 

2022 - Every Kind of Wind: Calder and the 21st Century, Nahmad Contemporary, New York
2022 - remiQXing still, Fiumano Clase, London
2022 - the Evolution of Ent-: QX, arebyte, London
2022 - Ent-, Light Art Space x Schering Stiftung, Berlin  
2022 - Among the Machines, Zabludowicz Collection, London
2022 - BioMedia, ZKM, Karlsruhe
2021 - CASCADE, Southbank Centre, London
2021 - Agency is the Ability to Act, Holden Gallery, Manchester
2021 - BIAS, Science Gallery, Dublin 
2021 - Ars Electronica, Linz
2021 - AI & Music, S+T+ARTS & Sonar Festival, CCCB, Barcelona
2020 - Real Time Constraints, arebyte, London
2019 - Euro(re)visions, Goethe Institut, London
2019 - Higher Resolutions with Hyphen Labs, Tate Modern, London
2019 - Open Fest with Sky Arts, Barbican, London
2018 - Digital Design Weekend, V&A, London
2018 - FAKE, Science Gallery, Dublin
2017 - Ars Electronica, Linz
2017 - Entangled: Quantum Computer Art, Royal College of Art, London
2017 - Humans Need Not Apply, Science Gallery, Dublin

 Awards and honours 
Her awards include
2022 - Lumen Prize, BCS Immersive Environment Award (for Ent-)
2022 - Mozilla Foundation Creative Media Award, USA
2022 - nominated for the S+T+ARTS prize
2021 - Adaptation Award, Artquest, London
2021 - British Council Amplify Collaboration Award
2018 - Arts Council England, National Lottery Project Grant
2018 - HeK Basel Net Based Art Award (shortlisted for Tinderbot)
2017 - Sky Arts 50
2016 - LIFEBOAT programme award
2015 - University of the Arts London Picton Art Prize (shortlisted) 
2015 - Helen Scott Lidgett Award (shortlisted) 
2014 - Ideas Tap Innovators Award