Cobots, or collaborative robots, are robots intended to interact with humans in a shared space or to work safely in close proximity. Cobots stand in contrast to traditional industrial robots which are designed to work autonomously with safety assured by isolation from human contact. "I, Cobot: Future collaboration of man and machine" The Manufacturer (2015-11-15). Retrieved on 2016-01-19
Cobot safety may rely on lightweight construction materials, rounded edges, and limits on speed or force. Safety may also require sensors and software to assure good collaborative behavior.https://ifr.org/downloads/papers/IFR_Demystifying_Collaborative_Robots.pdf. 

Thanks to sensors and other design features such as lightweight materials and rounded edges, collaborative robots (cobots) are able to interact directly and safely with humans.

The International Federation of Robotics (IFR)ifr.org, a global industry association of robot manufacturers and national robot associations, collects statistics on two types of robots – 1)industrial robots used in manufacturing and 2) service robots for domestic and professional use. Service robots can be considered to be cobots as they are intended to work alongside humans. Industrial robots have traditionally worked separately from humans, behind fences, but this is changing with the emergence of industrial cobots.

Cobots can have many roles. Collaborative service robots can perform a variety of functions, from information robots in public spaceshttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W-RKAjP1DtA.; logistics robots that transport materials within a buildinghttp://www.aethon.com/tug/tughealthcare/, to inspection robots equipped with cameras and visual processing technologies that can serve in a variety of applications such as patrolling perimeters of secure facilities: https://www.wired.com/story/i-spent-the-night-with-yelps-robot-security-guard-cobalt/.  Collaborative industrial robots can be used to automate repetitive, unergonomic tasks - such as fetching and carrying heavy parts, machine feeding and final assembly. Industrial robots have traditionally been used in industrial sectors for pre-assembly tasks such as cutting, welding, basic assembly of car bodies and painting. Collaborative industrial robots enable automotive and electronics manufacturers to extend automation to final product assembly, finishing tasks (for example polishing and applying coatings), and quality inspection. 

The IFR defines four types of collaborative manufacturing applications https://ifr.org/downloads/papers/IFR_Demystifying_Collaborative_Robots.pdf:
 Co-existence: Human and robot work alongside each other, but with no shared workspace.
 Sequential Collaboration: Human and robot share all or part of a workspace but do not work on a part or machine at the same time.
 Co-operation: Robot and human work on the same part or machine at the same time, and both are in motion.
 Responsive Collaboration: The robot responds in real-time to the worker’s motion.

In most industrial applications of cobots today, the cobot and human worker share the same space but complete tasks independently or sequentially (Co-existence or Sequential Collaboration.) Co-operation or Responsive Collaboration are presently less common.

 History 
Cobots were invented in 1996 by J. Edward Colgate and Michael Peshkin,"Mechanical Advantage" Chicago Tribune, Dec. 11, 1996. professors at Northwestern University.
A 1997 US patent filing"Cobots" US Patent 5,952,796 describes cobots as "an apparatus and method for direct physical interaction between a person and a general purpose manipulator controlled by a computer."
The invention resulted from a 1994 General Motors initiative led by Prasad Akella of the GM Robotics Center and a 1995 General Motors Foundation research grant intended to find a way to make robots or robot-like equipment safe enough to team with people."Here Come the Cobots!" Industry Week, Dec. 21, 2004 The first cobots assured human safety by having no internal source of motive power. Instead, motive power was provided by the human worker."Cobot architecture" IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation, Vol 17. Iss. 4, 2001
The cobot's function was to allow computer control of motion, by redirecting or steering a payload, in a cooperative way with the human worker. 
Later cobots provided limited amounts of motive power as well."A History of Collaborative Robots: From Intelligent Lift Assists to Cobots" Engineering.com, October 28, 2016   General Motors and an industry working group used the term Intelligent Assist Device (IAD) as an alternative to cobot, especially in the context of industrial material handling and automotive assembly operations. "Cobots for the automobile assembly line" International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Detroit, MI, 1999, pp. 728-733

Cobotics"Stanley moves into materials handling with Cobotics acquisition" Cranes Today, April 2, 2003, a company founded in 1997 by Colgate and Peshkin, produced several cobot models used in automobile final assembly   These cobots were of IFR type Responsive Collaboration. The company was acquired in 2003 by Stanley Assembly Technologies.  

KUKA released its first cobot, LBR 3, in 2004. This computer controlled lightweight robot was the result of a long collaboration with the German Aerospace Center institute. KUKA further refined the technology, releasing the KUKA LBR 4 in 2008 and the KUKA LBR iiwa in 2013. 

Universal Robots released its first cobot, the UR5, in 2008."A Brief History of Collaborative Robots" Engineering.com, May 19, 2016 In 2012 the UR10 cobot was released, and later a table top cobot, UR3, in 2015. Rethink Robotics released an industrial cobot, Baxter, in 2012"Baxter Kinematic Modeling, Validation and Reconfigurable Representation" SAE Technical Paper 2016-01-0334, 2016 and smaller, faster collaborative robot Sawyer in 2015, designed for high precision tasks.

FANUC  released its first collaborative robot in 2015 - the FANUC CR-35iA with a heavy 35kg payload. Since that time FANUC has released a smaller line of collaborative robots including the FANUC CR-4iA, CR-7iA and the CR-7/L long arm version.

ABB released in 2015 YuMi, the first collaborative dual arm robot.

 Standards and guidelines 
A draft safety standard for Intelligent Assist Devices was published by an industry working group in 2002. 
An updated safety standard was published in 2016.  The revised EN ISO 10218 standard Parts 1ISO 10218-1:2011 Robots and robotic devices – Safety requirements for industrial robots – Part 1: Robots. International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and 2ISO 10218-2:2011 Robots and robotic devices – Safety requirements for industrial robots – Part 2: Robot systems and integration. International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the ISO/TS 15066ISO/TS 15066:2016 Robots and robotic devices – Collaborative robots. International Organization for Standardization (ISO) specification define the safety requirements for collaborative robot applications. In this context, the collaborative robot also comprises the tools adapted on the robot arm to perform tasks as well as the objects handled by it.

The safety of a collaborative robot is ultimately determined by the application (for example, a cobot wielding a cutting tool would be unsafe if humans could make contact, whereas the same robot sorting foam chips would not be) . Consequently, the risk assessment accomplished by the robot manufacturer must also cover the envisioned industrial workplace. EN ISO 10218 Parts 1 and 2 build the basis for the risk assessment, together with the Machinery Directive.