The Flaming Forest is a 1926 American silent drama film directed by Reginald Barker and starring Antonio Moreno and Renée Adorée. The film is based on the novel of the same name by James Oliver Curwood, and was produced by Cosmopolitan Productions and distributed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.The Flaming Forest at silentera.com database  A two-color Technicolor sequence was shot for a climactic blaze sequence featured in the film.

This is a preserved film at the Library of Congress.The Library of Congress American Silent Feature Film Survival Catalog:The Flaming ForestCatalog of Holdings The American Film Institute Collection and The United Artists Collection at The Library of Congress p.59  c.1978 by The American Film Institute

Plot
North-West Mounted Police sergeant David Carrigan (Antonio Moreno) fights Indians and woos Jeanne-Marie (Renée Adorée). As described in a film magazine review,  the parents of Jeanne-Marie are killed when the renegade Indian Jules Lagarre raids the village. Lagarre continues his attacks and forces the people to quit their homes and property and Lagarre moves his forces into the hamlet. At this time, the North-West Mounted Police is just being organized, and in the detachment sent to the village is Sergeant David Carrigan. They arrive and drive off Lagarre and his men, but only temporarily. David falls in love with Jeanne-Marie. Her brother Roger, who is sort of a weakling, kills two of Lagarre's men, but the "justice for all" order forces David to arrest Roger, even though he is a relative of the woman he loves. For this, Jeanne-Marie vows her hate for David. Lagarre leads an Indian attack on the hamlet and a terrific battle is waged. Lagarre kidnaps Jeanne-Marie and David is killed trying to save her. David races through a blazing forest fire to her rescue and eventually the insurrection is quelled. David and Jeanne-Marie are now happy together.

Cast
 Antonio Moreno as Sergeant David Carrigan 
 Renée Adorée as Jeanne-Marie 
 Gardner James as Roger Audemard 
 William Austin as Alfred Wimbledon 
 Tom O'Brien as Mike 
 Emile Chautard as André Audemard 
 Oscar Beregi, Sr. as Jules Lagarre 
 Clarence Geldart as Major Charles McVane 
 Frank Leigh as Lupin 
 Charles Ogle as Donald McTavish 
 Roy Coulson as François 
 D'Arcy McCoy as Bobbie 
 Claire McDowell as Mrs. McTavish 
 Bert Roach as Sloppy 
 Mary Jane Irving as Ruth McTavish