Die Kathedrale (English: The Cathedral) is a German text adventure game published in 1991 by Software 2000 and developed by Weltenschmiede, and released for Amiga and DOS. Die Kathedrale is part of a text adventure trilogy; it is preceeded by Das Stundenglas (1990) and succeeded by Hexuma (1992).

Plot
The protagonist takes a tour through St. Pauls Kathedrale in the fictional town of Schoenau, which is celebrating its 850th anniversary. There they bump into their former classmate Dani, who is also visiting the cathedral. The cathedral’s visiting hours end, and the pair, having lost track of time, are locked inside. They explore the cathedral and discover letters dating back to the 15th century, copies of which are included with the game. The letters suggest that Victor Paz, the architect of the cathedral, hid fifteen deadly traps in the cathedral to enact revenge on the Catholic Church as a whole, but also specifically against the Bishop Sebastian of Altenburg who murdered one of Paz’s relatives under the Inquisition. It is also later revealed that Paz is the half brother of Jan Hus, a historical figure who was burned at the stake for heresy. The protagonist must visit three different years in time, and disarm five of the traps in each era; the three years being 1992, 1881 and 1437.

Gameplay
In contrast to classic text adventures, which have no images, Die Kathedrale has 120 pictures of various locations to accompany the text. Die Kathedrale's backgrounds can be interacted with in the style of a point and click adventure, while interactions with objects are inputted using text commands. Die Kathedrale has a time limit of 56 in-game hours; after this point, the alternate time zones will become unaccessable and the game will end. Die Kathedrale has 150 different rooms.

Development
Die Kathedrale is the second game in a trilogy of text adventure games about time travel by developer Weltenschmiede; Die Kathedrale is preceeded by Das Stundenglas (1990) and succeeded by Hexuma (1992).

Publisher Software 2000 describes Die Kathedrale as an "Artventure" game due to the addition of graphics to the text adventure format - one of eight games in this range. Die Kathedrale was bundled with feelies, including a poster, blueprints of the cathedral, a brochure detailing the cathedral's history, and copies of letters from the 15th century that can be found in-game. These feelies serve as a form of copy protection as they are referenced in the game and required for puzzles.

In 1993 Die Kathedrale's programmer Harald Evers published a novel based on the game, Die Kathedrale: Das Geheimnis einer Rache.

Reception
Amiga Joker gave the Amiga version of Die Kathedrale an overall score of 87%, calling it "complex" and "the best German text adventure so far" and praised the text adventure format: "The game understands almost any input, and in addition the legibility of the output text is excellent." Amiga Joker noted Die Kathedrale as an improvement over its predecessor, Das Stundenglas, citing improved graphics and 'more interesting' feelies. Amiga Joker also praised the addition of graphical backgrounds, calling them "vibrant & stimulating", but criticized the abscence of music aside from the title screen. Amiga Joker noted Die Kathedrale's feelies, praising the "immersive" aged effect of the documents, and stating that "The first thing you notice are the thick and original instructions, which are written like a personal report ... four skillfully aged letters, within which the plot of the game is buried ... the blueprints of the cathedral are very nice and fit the style [of the game]." In their conclusion, Amiga Joker summarised Die Kathedrale as "an exciting mystery game with an extra portion of fun - excellent for adventurers whom struggle with the English language, an absolute must!"