Niki is India's first B2C commerce platform that provides a voice centred and local language based user experience.  Niki is empowering the new to internet users with a simplified online experience curated in their own language, that helps them in making online transactions. Built for Bharat, by IIT Kharagpur graduates Sachin Jaiswal, Keshav Prawasi, Shishir Modi and Nitin Babel, Niki was officially registered on June 4, 2015. It was then launched to the public, a month later at YourStory’s TechSparks, being one of the Tech30 companies. 

The company raised an undisclosed amount in seed funding from Unilazer Ventures, a Mumbai-based VC firm founded by Ronnie Screwvala, in October 2015. This was followed by another seed funding round by Ratan Tata in May 2016. The company then raised US$2 million in Series A round of funding from SAP.iO, existing investors and some US and Germany-based investors, among others.

 Product 
Niki is designed as a virtual agent also known as Bharat ki agent for the emerging internet users of India living in Tier 2 and beyond, to pay monthly bills, do prepaid recharges or make travel bookings, just by talking. The experience being much similar to the offline world, where every service is availed via talking to the service provider, users place online orders using voice, in their own language while it assists them through every step of the payment process and providing 100% fulfilment guarantee. 

Niki caters to the 60% of the 390 million internet users in India who are yet to transact online due to language and interface barriers. Its vernacular users have now expanded to 12,000+ locations such as Jaipur, Gharsana, Surat, Aurangabad, Muzaffarnagar, Ludhiana, Patna, Indore, Sri Ganganagar, Faridabad, Agra. 

The company is currently in its hyper-growth phase, witnessing phenomenal adoption in Tier 2 and Tier 3 with 80% of the current 5 million+ user-base coming from these towns. It will soon launch language support in multiple Indian languages including Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, Bengali and Marathi to become a one stop commerce solution for all of Bharat.

 Achievements 
2015: Yourstory Tech30

2016: Nasscom emerge 50

2016: Startup50

2017: Winner of the HDFC Digital Innovation Summit 

2017: AWS Mobility Awards: Deep Tech Award

2017: India fintech awards (IFTA): Fintech Rising Stars Award

2018: Superstartups Asia

2019: Forbes 30 under 30