Sandhitha Velai (English: Time we met) is a 2000 Indian Tamil-language drama film directed by Ravichandran, his second film after Kannedhirey Thondrinal (1998). The film stars Karthik in two roles. Roja and Kausalya play the female leads, while Vijayakumar, Sujatha, Moulee, Chinni Jayanth, Vivek, Manivannan, and Nassar play supporting roles alongside an ensemble cast. The film was released on 14 April 2000 during Tamil New Year. It received negative reviews and was a moderate success at the box office. The Telugu film Gentleman (2016) starring Nani was loosely inspired by this film. 

Plot
Aadalarasu (Karthik) is an unemployed youth looking for a job. He is constantly taunted on this account by his father, Gurumoorthy (Vijayakumar), while his mother (Sujatha) comes to his support. In Madras for a job interview, he stays with his father's friend Sivaraman (Moulee). Aadalarasu has run-ins with Sivaraman's daughter Thilaka (Roja) and she develops a dislike for him. However, she bows to her father's wishes and weds Aadalarasu. Just when she starts liking him, he has to travel again. In the train, he meets Thirunaavukkarasu (Karthik again), who asks him for a favour. Instead of the usual comedy, the mistaken identity is then played for sentiment. With Thirunaavukkarasu dying and being mistaken for Aadalarasu, Aadalarasu's family think that he is dead while he takes Thirunaavukkarasu's place and helps them, but he has to do so without arousing the suspicions of his wife Akalya (Kausalya) and the rest of his family.

Cast

Karthik as Nadarajan (or) Aadalarasu and Thirunaavukkarasu
Roja as Thilaka
Kausalya as Akalya
Vijayakumar as Gurumoorthy, Aadalarasu's father
Sujatha as Aadalarasu's mother
T. S. B. K. Moulee as Sivaraman, Thilaka's father
Chinni Jayanth as Jeeva
Vivek
Manivannan
Nassar
Sonu Sood as Sandeep
Thalaivasal Vijay as Vasu
Ramji
Anu Mohan
Madhan Bob
Thyagu
Pandu
Bala Singh
Thalapathy Dinesh
Shakti Kumar
Raju Sundaram as Special appearance

Production
The filming began in 1998 and was the second directorial work by Ravichandran. It was briefly delayed due to the selection of heroines. Isha Koppikar and then Suvalakshmi were selected for a role, but their refusal meant that Roja was signed. For another lead role, Simran was selected but due to date clashes, she too was replaced by Kausalya. There were rumours that the film was delayed because of Karthik experiencing trouble due to his health.- - 

Soundtrack
The music was composed by Deva.

 No.  Song  Singers Lyrics 1  Ceylon Singala Penne  Sukhwinder Singh, Sabesh  K. Subash 2  Chinna Ponnu  T. K. Kala  Vairamuthu 3  Kobapadathe Muniamma  Sabesh  Ponniyin Selvan 4  Pennkiliye  P. Unnikrishnan, Sujatha Vairamuthu 5  Vaa Vaa En Thalaiva  Harini, P. Unnikrishnan, 'Mahanadi' Shobana