Sandhitha Velai (English: Time we met) is a 2000 Indian Tamil-language drama film directed by Ravichandran being his second film after his debut Kannedhirey Thondrinal (1998). The film features Karthik in dual lead roles. Roja and Kausalya play the female leads, while Vijayakumar, Sujatha, Moulee, Chinni Jayanth, Vivek, Manivannan, and Nassar play supporting roles alongside an ensemble cast. The film was released on 14 April 2000 during Tamil New Year. The film received negative reviews and was declared as a moderate success at the box office. Telugu film Gentleman (2016) starring Nani was loosely inspired from this film.http://www.bbthots.com/reviews/2000/svelai.html

Plot
Aadalarasu (Karthik) is an unemployed youth looking for a job. He is constantly taunted on this account by his father Gurumoorthy (Vijayakumar), while his mother (Sujatha) comes to his support. In Madras for a job interview, he stays with his father's friend Sivaraman (Moulee). Aadalarasu has run-ins with Sivaraman's daughter Thilaka (Roja), but she develops a dislike for him. However, she bows to her father's wishes and weds Aadalarasu. Just when she starts liking him, he has to travel again. In the train, he meets Thirunaavukkarasu (Karthik again), who asks him for a favor. Instead of the usual comedy, the mistaken identity is then played for sentiments. With Thirunaavukkarasu dying and being mistaken for Aadalarasu, Aadalarasu's family thinks that he is dead while he takes Thirunaavukkarasu's place and helps them, but he has to do so without arousing the suspicions of his wife Akalya (Kausalya) and the rest of his family.

Cast

Karthik as Nadarajan (or) Aadalarasu and Thirunaavukkarasu
Roja as Thilaka
Kausalya as Akalya
Vijayakumar as Gurumoorthy, Aadalarasu's father
Sujatha as Aadalarasu's mother
T. S. B. K. Moulee as Sivaraman, Thilaka's father
Chinni Jayanth as Jeeva
Vivek
Manivannan
Nassar
Sonu Sood as Sandeep
Thalaivasal Vijay as Vasu
Ramji
Anu Mohan
Madhan Bob
Thyagu
Pandu
Bala Singh
Thalapathy Dinesh
Shakti Kumar
Raju Sundaram as Special appearance

Production
The filming was begun in 1998 and became the second directorial of Ravichandran after his debut Kannedhirey Thondrinal. The film was briefly delayed due to selection of heroines. Suvalakshmi was initially selected as heroine later she was replaced by Roja. For second heroine, Simran was selected but due to date clashes, she was replaced by Isha but she too was replaced by Kousalya.https://web.archive.org/web/20000818181632/http://www.tamilstar.com/topnews/simran2.shtml There were rumours that film was delayed due to Karthik experiencing trouble due to his health.

Soundtrack
Music is composed by Deva.http://www.raaga.com/channels/tamil/moviedetail.asp?mid=t0000234
Chinna Ponnu - T. K. Kala - Vairamuthu
Vaa Vaa En Thalaiva - P. Unnikrishnan, Harini - Vairamuthu
Pennkiliye - Unnikrishnan, Sujatha Mohan - Vairamuthu
Ceylon Singala Penne - Sukhwinder Singh - K. Subaash
Muniyamma Kobapadathe - Sabesh - Ponniyin Selvan