The Canadian Energy Centre (CEC), also known as the Canadian Energy Centre Limited (CECL), is a Calgary, Alberta-based private corporation launched on December 11, 2019 by the United Conservative Party government of Alberta, under Premier Jason Kenney. The CEC's mandate is to improve Alberta's oil and gas sector reputation and to refute and rebut critics.

Background

The creation of a 'war room' capable of challenging "energy industry critics' inaccuracies" was an election promise made by then candidate Jason Kenney as part of his campaign leading up to the April 16 2019 Alberta general election. In the founding speech of the UCP on May 9, 2018, Kenney announced that he would engage in "national and international advocacy" including a "fully staffed rapid response war room in government to quickly and effectively rebut every lie told by the green left about our world-class energy industry. If companies like HSBC decide to boycott our oil sands, our government will boycott them. It's called a market decision." Premier Kenney, whose United Conservative Party (UCP), won a majority of seats in the Alberta Legislature announced the creation of Calgary-based $30 million "Energy War Room" in June 7, 2019 to "fight misinformation related to oil and gas".

On May 6, 2019 Nick Koolsbergen, who was the UCP's Alberta campaign manager for the winning election, announced the establishment of the Wellington Advocacy government relations firm with Harper & Associates' Rachel Curran. Both Koolsbergen and Curran had worked in the PMO of former Prime Minister Stephen Harper. According to a May 17, 2019 CBC article, the Postmediacontracted the Wellington Advocacy to "lobby" the UCP on "how it could be involved with" the new 'energy war room'.

In July 2019, Kenney announced the establishment of a one-year $2.5 million "Public inquiry into anti-Alberta energy campaigns" to investigate potential anti-Alberta energy campaigns. Kenney cited the work of "Vivian Krause", who has spent ten years examining foreign funding of Canadian environmental non-profit organizations (ENGOs) and who claimed that Alberta's interests were being "challenged by well-funded foreign actors who have been waging a decade-long campaign to land lock Alberta's oil." The public inquiry, which was officially established in July 2019 with a "mandate to investigate foreign-funded efforts", is led by the former board chair of the Calgary Economic Development—a forensic accountant—Steve Allan. The inquiry will include interviews, research, and potentially, public hearings.

In October 9, 2019 Energy Minister Sonya Savage announced that the CEC was incorporated.

The Centre (CEC) was officially launched on December 11 by Premier Kenney at a press conference at the Southern Alberta Institute of Technology (SAIT).

Mandate and description
Its mandate is to "highlight achievements in Alberta's oil and gas sector" and to "refute what it deems to be misinformation about the industry." Kenney said the centre will "counter misinformation" "coming from some environmental groups and others seeking to landlock Alberta's oil and gas".

At the December 11 launch, Olsen described the Centre as a place to tell the story of the oil and gas industry in Alberta, which includes rebutting its critics respectfully.

Funding
The Canadian Energy Centre is funded by the Alberta provincial government with a budget of $30 million dollars. Post Media's Financial Post describes the CEC as an "Alberta government corporation partly funded by industry."

Private corporation
The Canadian Energy Centre Limited is a private corporation, which means that it is not subject to Alberta's Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act (FOIP Act). Premier Kenney's press secretary Christine Myatt said that keeping CECL's internal operations secret is a "tactical and/or strategic advantage to the very foreign-funded special interests the CEC is looking to counter."

Key people
Tom Olsen, a former journalist and lobbyist, was appointed as CEO and managing director of the war room which will be called the Canadian Energy Centre Limited (CECL). Mark Milke is a CEC "executive director of research."

Board of Directors

The CEC's board of directors is composed of Alberta's Minister of Energy, Sonya Savage Minister of Justice and Solicitor General, Doug Schweitzer, and Jason Nixon, Minister of Environment and Parks. Minister Savage previously worked on major projects, including the Enbridge Northern Gateway Pipelines project and was formerly an executive of Canadian Energy Pipeline Association (CEPA).

Themes
The first CEC staff article entitled "Alberta father irked by charity group that targets fossil fuel industry" newly-launched CEC website. It "scrutinized" Steven Lee, the founder of the Foundation for Environmental Stewardship (FES). An irate parent was concerned about the presentation and the Three Percent Project handout given to his fifteen-year-old son at his Airdrie, Alberta school on December 5, 2019. Lee received a phone message from a caller saying, "I'm a reporter with the Canadian Energy Centre. Our website is launching next week and we will be writing a story about the 3% Project, which has raised concerns among some parents who reached out to us following presentations at their children's schools." The 3% Project is a "flagship project" of FES, established by then-19-year-old Steve Lee in 2012.

In a December 18 rebuttal to the December 14 Medicine Hat News critical opinion piece, that said that the CEC was not "subject to freedom-of-information searches" and that the Centre "could be used to stifle legitimate dissent and commentary on the oil and gas industry", Olson, who is a former Calgary Herald journalist, said that "oversight" of the CEC is "rigorous" and that the centre is subject to the Fiscal Planning and Transparency Act, the Whistle Blowers Act and audits by Alberta's auditor general. Olsen added that "campaigns to shut down new pipeline projects and damage the reputation of our oil and gas industry have received tens of millions of dollars from U.S. environmental foundations." This has resulted in the "landlocking of Alberta energy" which had resulted in the loss of jobs, "tens of billions of dollars" in capital, less money for public services, as well as "lower value for their shareholders that include many of the country’s biggest pension plans and investment funds."

In his CEC post, Grady Semmens responded to the December 27, 2019 opinion piece published in The Globe and Mail by Bill McKibben, an American author and environmentalist, who called on Canada to go beyond cutting emissions to "stop digging up oil and gas and selling it around the world." Semmens said that Canada was only "responsible for less than 1.6 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions." Semmens cited a Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP) which cited a January 9, 2007 Statistics Canada report. Economist Andrew Leach who described the Centre as a "pro-energy corporation" is providing a rebuttal of truth claims made by the CEC on their website.

Canadian Energy Centre Logo

The CEC logo, which was unveiled at the launch, was also used in the December 11 promotional video, on the CEC's website, "on the wall of its downtown Calgary office, and on signs". By the evening of December 18, "social media users" on Twitter began to share side-by-side versions of the CEC logo and the "trademarked symbol" for Progress Software Corporation, the Massachusetts-headquartered "software giant"—Progress Software, A December 19 Canadian Press report said that the icons were "identical, stylized sharp-angled depictions of what appear to be radiating waves... the Progress one is emerald-green and the war room version is two shades of blue." According to a CP report, the Massachusetts-headquartered "software giant"—Progress Software sent an email that morning saying that it was "looking into whether Alberta’s new energy war room has violated the company's trademarked logo."

In a December 19 statement, the energy centre's CEO and managing director, Tom Olsen, said that the logo was pulled and was to be replaced. Olsen said that the "design debacle" "mistake" was an "unfortunate situation". He said that the CEC was in "discussions" with the marketing agency—Lead & Anchor "to determine how it happened". The CEC had selected Lead & Anchor over eight other contractors proposed to the CEC by the Calgary marketing agency, Communo.

On December 27, the Calgary Herald reported that Pasadena, California-based ATK Technologies Inc.—a company that developed the mobile phone Alpha Browser app launched in 2018—claimed that the logo the CEC was using to replace its original logo, was "similar" to the Alpha Browser app logo—a "stylized, red-striped letter "a." The new CEC logo appears to take that same letter "a" and turn it on its side, with a red maple leaf added to the top right corner." According to the Herald a member of ATK said that the logo was ATK's "intellectual property" and that they their legal team was "on top of it."