The Eastin-Knill theorem is a  no-go theorem that states: "No quantum error correcting code can have a continuous symmetry which acts transversely on physical qubits. In other words, no quantum error correcting code can transversely implement a  universal gate set. Since quantum computers are inherently noisy, quantum error correcting codes are used to correct errors that affect information due to decoherence. Unfortunately, error corrected data has to be decoded in order to perform gates on the qubits. Decoding the data makes it prone to errors. Fault tolerant quantum computation bypasses this by performing gates on encoded data. Transversal gates can be used to perform fault tolerant but not universal quantum computation by guaranteeing that errors don't spread uncontrollably though the computation. This is because transversal gates ensure that each qubit in a code block is acted on by at most a single physical gate and each code block is corrected independently when an error occurs. Due to the Eastin-Knill theorem,  a universal set like } gates can't be implemented fault tolerantly because the T gate can't be implemented transversely in the Steane code. This calls for ways of circumventing Eastin-Knill in order to perform fault tolerant quantum computation. In addition to investigating fault tolerant quantum computation, the Eastin-Knill theorem is also useful for studying quantum gravity via the AdS/CFT correspondence and in Condensed matter physics via Many-body theory.
Approximate Eastin-Knill theorem
The approximate version of the Eastin Knill theorem states: "If a code admits a universal set of transversal gates and corrects erasure with fixed accuracy, then for each logical qubit, a number of physical qubits per subsystem that is inversely proportional to the error parameter is needed". The approximate version of the Eastin-Knill theorem is more robust than the original because it explains why it is impossible to have continuous symmetries for transversal gates on the Microscopic scale while also explaining how it's possible to have continuous symmetries for transversal gates on the Macroscopic scale. 
Circumventing Eastin-Knill
The Eastin Knill theorem doesn't prohibit protocols that provide fault tolerant quantum computation. Some methods of getting around the Eastin-Knill:
 Code switching

 Code drift

 Using continuous variables
 Shor's fault tolerant toffoli gate 

 Teleportation of gates

 Magic state distillation 

 Multiple partitions 

 Pieceable fault tolerance 

 Universal braiding 