Iceman () is a 2017 German-Italian-Austrian adventure film directed by Felix Randau. It is a fictional story about the life of Ötzi, a natural mummy of a man found in 1991 in the Ötztal Alps.

Plot
In the Ötztal Alps, more than 5300 years ago, a Neolithic clan has settled near a creek. It is their leader Kelab's responsibility to be the keeper of the group’s holy shrine, Tineka. While Kelab is hunting, the settlement is attacked. The members of the tribe are brutally murdered, amongst them Kelab’s wife and son, but although his newborn survives, he is missing. Blinded by pain and fury, Kelab is out for one thing alone – vengeance. He sets out after the murderers on what turns into a grand odyssey where he must fight constantly – for the infant’s survival; against the immense forces of nature; against hunters he encounters; and, amongst the loneliness of the quest, against a growing sense of doubt over the morality of his mission.

Cast
 Jürgen Vogel - Kelab (Ötzi)
 Susanne Wuest - Kisis
 André Hennicke - Krant
 Violetta Schurawlow - Mitar
 Franco Nero - Ditob

 Reception 
On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 86% based on 22 reviews, with a weighted average rating of 6.12/10. The website's critical consensus reads: "A prehistoric drama with the heart of a western, Iceman uses classic archetypes -- and deft direction -- to tell a stark and simple yet powerfully effective story." On Metacritic, the film has a score of 52 out of 100, based on 6 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".

 Accolades 

+List of awards and nominations Award Date of ceremony Category Recipient(s) Result  German Film Awards 27 April 2018 Best Makeup Heike Merker   Best Sound Gregor Bonse, Thomas Neumann, Marc Parisotto  German Film Critics Association Awards February 2, 2018 Best Film Score Beat Solèr   Hamburg International Film Festival October 6, 2018 Best Feature Felix Randau  Locarno International Film Festival Aug. 11, 2018 Variety Piazza Grande Award Felix Randau 