Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI) is a graduate-level, research-based academic institution located in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. The current president, Professor Eric Xing, joined in January 2021. Sir J. Michael Brady served as the founding, interim president. Professor Ling Shao was the initiator and the founding provost and executive vice president. 

The establishment of MBZUAI is part of the United Arab Emirates strategy for Artificial Intelligence 2031, for which came the appointment of the world's first Minister of State for Artificial Intelligence.

As of June 2022, MBZUAI ranks 127th globally among institutions that conduct research in computer science according to CSRankings. In artificial intelligence, computer vision, machine learning, and natural language processing specifically the university ranks 30th globally.

The university provides admitted students with a full scholarship, including benefits such as a monthly allowance, health insurance, and accommodation. The university also secures internships by working with local and global companies. The initial class of graduate students were slated to start coursework in September 2020, but due to the COVID-19 pandemic coursework began in January 2021.

Professional services

In October 2021, the university launched an Executive Program  aimed at supporting decision makers to implement AI in their organizations. 

The MBZUAI Executive Program includes: 

Pieter Abbeel – the University of California, Berkeley
Sir J. Michael Brady – the University of Oxford
Justine Cassell – Paris AI Research Institute (PRAIRIE)
Michael I. Jordan – the University of California, Berkeley
Thomas Mitchell – Carnegie Mellon University
David Parkes – Harvard University
Daniela Rus – Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)

In March 2022, the university graduated the first class of Executive Program participants. A second class was announced in March 2022 by President Eric Xing.

Research
The university serves as a hub for AI research and education.