Battling Buttler is a musical in three acts with music by Philip Braham and a book and lyrics by Stanley Brightman, Austin Melford and Douglas Furber, which opened in London in 1922. It was then greatly revised by Walter L. Rosemont (music) and Ballard MacDonald (book and lyrics) and produced on Broadway in 1923 after tryouts in Detroit and Chicago.

The farcical story concerns a man who pretends to be a championship boxer whom he resembles, until the two men are confused with one another, with humorous results.

Productions
Battling Buttler premiered in  London on December 8, 1922, at the New Oxford Theatre, where it ran for 238 performances, starring Jack Buchanan, who also produced and choreographed the musical.Dietz, pp. 172–173Kenrick, John. "The 1920s", Musicals101.com, 2003, accessed January 7, 2020

Sheet music from The Dancing Honeymoon
After a major rewrite and Americanization by Walter L. Rosemont (music) and Ballard MacDonald (book and lyrics), the musical was produced under the name The Dancing Honeymoon, opening on August 19, 1923, to rave reviews in Detroit, Michigan.Detroit Free Press, August 20, 1923, p. 6 It then played in Chicago under the same name before coming to New York.The New York Times, October 9, 1923, p. 17 It was then renamed Mr. Battling Buttler and opened on Broadway at the Selwyn Theater on October 8, 1923, and closed on April 20, 1924, when it moved to the Times Square Theatre, opening the next day on April 21, 1924, and closing July 5, 1924, for a total of 313 performances. It was produced in America by George Choos by arrangement with Buchanan and The Selwyns.Battling Buttler, Internet Broadway Database, accessed January 1, 2020 The musical was staged in America by Guy F. Bragdon, with dances arranged by Dave Bennett, and featured songs by Joseph Meyer, Adorjan Dorian Otvos and Louis Breau. Only two of the Braham and Furber songs were retained. A radio performance was played on radio station WOR on October 22, 1923.The Philadelphia Inquirer, October 21, 1923, p. 57 After Broadway, the show went on the road, including performances in Philadelphia at the Chestnut Street Opera House starting November 10, 1924,The Philadelphia Inquirer, November 11, 1924, p. 8 and in Wilmington, Delaware, starting December 22, 1924.The Evening Journal, December 15, 1924, p. 11, and December 23, 1924, p. 15 The cast starred Charles Ruggles.Mantle, p. 330

The musical was adapted into a 1926 silent film titled Battling Butler directed by and starring Buster Keaton. The New York Times noted the difference in the spelling of the name of the central character between the stage and film versions.The New York Times, August 23, 1926, p. 9

Synopsis (American version)
Alfred Buttler, who leads a quiet life in a small town in New Hampshire, somewhat resembles a welterweight boxing champion by the same name. He tells his trusting wife that he is the boxing champion, although he knows nothing about boxing. This gives Alfred the opportunity to leave home for weeks at a time to attend "training". Instead, he goes to have fun in the city with his old friends. In the second act, his wife (and the chorus) follow him, and the real Battling Buttler, who likes the joke, insists that the fake Buttler take his place in the boxing ring. When Alfred's wife runs into the boxer's wife, the two women assume that they are married to the same man, and farcical complications ensue.

Roles and American cast
Alfred Buttler – Charlie Ruggles
Ernest Hozier – William T. Kent
Battling Buttler – Frank Sinclair
Bertha Buttler, the boxer's wife – Frances Halliday
Mrs. Alfred Buttler – Helen Eley
Deacon Grafton – Eugene McGregor
Nancy – Helen La Vonne
Marigold – Mildred Keats
Edith – Marie Saxon
A Chauffeur – George Sands
Frank Bryant – Jack Squire
Sweeney – Guy Voyer
Spink – Teddy McNamara
Feature Dancers – Grant and Wing
Eccentric Dancers – George Sands and Mack Davis
Exceptional Dancer – George Dobbs

Songs from the Broadway version 
(music by Rosemont and lyrics by MacDonald, unless otherwise noted)
Act I (The Home of Alfred Buttler, Silver Lake, New Hampshire)
 “If Every Day Was Sunday” – Deacon Grafton, Ensemble and others (music by A. Dorian Otvos)
 “You’re So Sweet” – Marigold, Edith and Ensemble (music by Joseph Meyer)
 “Apples, Bananas and You” – Alfred Buttler and Mrs. Alfred Buttler (music by Philip Braham; lyrics by Douglas Furber)
 “Two Little Pals” – Frank Bryant and Ernest Hozier
 “Will You Marry Me?” – Marigold and others

Act II (“Sweeney’s” at Malba, Long Island)
 “Tinkle Tune” – Spink, Nancy, Ensemble and others (music by Louis Breau and Otvos)
 “Dancing Honeymoon” – Frank Bryant, Marigold, Ensemble and others (music by Philip Braham; lyrics by Douglas Furber)
 “All Dressed Up” – Kate and Ensemble
 “Wish” – Battling Buttler
 “Finale” – Company

Act III (The 400 Athletic Club, New York City)
 “As We leave the Years Behind” – Marigold, Frank Bryant and others (music by Meyer)
 “In the Spring” – Edith and Ernest Hozier (music by Otvos)

Reception
Burns Mantle of The Daily News called it "a lively show, spotted with excellent dance numbers, decorated with a variety of showy costumes and tunefully sung."Daily News, October 12, 1923, p. 56 John Corbin, of The New York Times, said “there is an infectious spirit to the thing that carries it at high speed through the three acts.”