This article is about the musical play, “Battling Buttler.”  Use this link for the Buster Keaton film, “Battling Butler.”

Battling Buttler is a musical in three acts with music by Walter L. Rosemont, from the original of Philip Braham, lyrics by Ballard MacDonald and book by Ballard MacDonald from the original of Stanley Brightman, Austin Melford, and Douglas Furber. The story concerns a person who pretends to be a championship fighter.

It was produced on Broadway in 1923.

Production
Battling Buttler premiered on Broadway at the Selwyn Theater on October 8, 1923, and closed on April 20, 1924, when it moved to the Times Square Theatre, opening in April 21, 1924, and closing July 5, 1924, for a total of 313 performances. It was produced by George Choos by arrangement with Jack Buchanan and The SelwynsButtler-1871 Battling Buttler, Internet Broadway Database, accessed January 1, 2020 It was staged by Guy F. Bragdon with dances arranged by Dave Bennett; musical director was Paul Yartin; featuring songs by Joseph Meyer, A. Dorian Otvos, Philip Braham, and Louis Breau; also songs with lyrics by Douglas Furber. When the show played in Chicago before coming to New York it was called “The Dancing Honeymoon.” The New York Times, October 9, 1923, p. 17
|image=Dancing.jpg
|name=The Dancing Honeymoon.

The cast starred Charles RugglesMantle, p. 330

The play was made into a 1926 silent film entitled “Battling Butler” directed by and starring Buster Keaton.

Synopsis
Alfred Buttler somewhat resembles a welterweight boxing champion by the same name.  He tells his wife, who trusts him, that he is, in fact, the champion himself.  This gives Alfred the opportunity to leave home for weeks at a time to attend training.  In the second act, however, his wife (and all the chorus) follow him and the real Alfred Buttler, who likes the joke, insists that the fake Buttler take his place in the boxing ring.  

Roles and original cast
Alfred Buttler – Charles Ruggles
Ernest Hozier – William Kent
Battling Buttler – Frank Sinclair
Bertha Buttler – Francis Halliday
Mrs. Alfred Buttler – Helen Ely
Deacon Grafton – Eugene McGregor
Nancy – Helen La Vonne
Marigold – Mildred Keats
Edith – Marie Saxon
A Chauffeur – George Sands
Frank Bryant – Jack Squire
Sweeney – Guy Voyer
Spink – Teddy McNamara
Feature Dancers – Grant and Wing
Eccentric Dancers – George Sands and Mack Davis
Exceptional Dancer – George Dobbs

Songs 
Act I (The Home of Alfred Buttler, Silver Lake, New Hampshire)
 “If Every Day Was Sunday” – Deacon Grafton and others
 “You’re So Sweet” – Marigold, Edith and others
 “Apples, Bananas and You” – Alfred Buttler and Mrs. Alfred Buttler
 “Two Little Pals” – Frank Bryant and Ernest Hozier
 “Will You Marry Me?” – Marigold and others

Act II (“Sweeney’s” at Malba, Long Island)
 “Tinkle Tune” – Spink, Nancy and others
 “Dancing Honeymoon” – Frank Bryant, Marigold and others
 “All Dressed Up” – Kate and Ensemble
 “Wish” – Battling Buttler
 “Finale” – Company

Act III (The 400 Athletic Club, New York City)
 “As We leave the Years Behind” – Marigold, Frank Bryant and others
 “In the Spring” – Edith and Ernest Hozier

Reception
John Corbin of The New York Times said “there is an infectious spirit to the thing that carries it at high speed through the three acts.”<ref name=The New York Times/ref> 