Google AI is a division of Google dedicated to artificial intelligence. It was announced at Google I/O 2017 by CEO Sundar Pichai.

This division has expanded its reach with research facilities in various parts of the world such as Zurich, Paris, Israel, and Beijing. In 2023, Google AI was part of the reorganization initiative that elevated its head, Jeff Dean, to the position of chief scientist at Google. This reorganization involved the merging of Google Brain and DeepMind, a UK-based company that Google acquired in 2014 that operated separately from the company's core research.

In March 2019 Google announced the creation of an Advanced Technology External Advisory Council (ATEAC) comprising eight members: Alessandro Acquisti, Bubacarr Bah, De Kai, Dyan Gibbens, Joanna Bryson, Kay Coles James, Luciano Floridi and William Joseph Burns.  Following objections from a large number of Google staff to the appointment of Kay Coles James, the Council was abandoned within one month of its establishment.

Projects
 Google Vids: AI-powered video creation for work.
 Google Assistant: is a virtual assistant software application since 2023 developed by Google AI.
 Serving cloud-based TPUs (tensor processing units) in order to develop machine learning software. The TPU research cloud provides free access to a cluster of cloud TPUs to researchers engaged in open-source machine learning research.
 TensorFlow: a machine learning software library.
 Magenta: a deep learning research team exploring the role of machine learning as a tool in the creative process. The team has released many open source projects allowing artists and musicians to extend their processes using AI. With the use of Magenta, musicians and composers could create high-quality music at a lower cost, making it easier for new artists to enter the industry.
 Sycamore: a new 54-qubit programmable quantum processor.
 LaMDA: a family of conversational neural language models.
 The creation of datasets in under-represented languages, to facilitate the training of AI models in these languages.

Former
 Bard: a chatbot based on the Gemini model, no longer developed by Google AI since February 8, 2024, as the chatbot (now merged into the Gemini brand) is now developed by Google DeepMind.
 Duet AI: a Google Workspace integration that can notably generate text or images, no longer developed by Google AI since February 8, 2024, as the Google Workspace integration (now merged into the Gemini brand) is now developed by Google DeepMind.