WolframAlpha ( ) is a computational knowledge engine and answer engine developed by Wolfram Research. It answers factual queries directly by computing the answer from externally sourced data.

WolframAlpha was released on May 18, 2009, and is based on Wolfram's earlier product Wolfram Mathematica, a computational platform for calculation, visualization, and statistics capabilities. Additional data is gathered from both academic and commercial websites such as the CIA's The World Factbook, the United States Geological Survey, a Cornell University Library publication called All About Birds, Chambers Biographical Dictionary, Dow Jones, the Catalogue of Life, CrunchBase, Best Buy, and the FAA. 

 Technology 
 Overview 
Users submit queries and computation requests via a text field. WolframAlpha then computes answers and relevant visualizations from a knowledge base of curated, structured data that come from other sites and books. It is able to respond to particularly phrased natural language fact-based questions, or more complex questions. It displays its "Input interpretation" of such a question, using standardized phrases. Mathematical symbolism can be parsed by the engine, which responds with numerical and statistical results.

 Development 
WolframAlpha is written in the Wolfram Language, a general multi-paradigm programming language, and implemented in Mathematica and ran on more than 10,000 CPUs as of 2009.

 Usage 
WolframAlpha has been used to power some searches in the Microsoft Bing and DuckDuckGo search engines but is not currently used. For factual question answering, it is sometimes queried by Apple's Siri and Amazon Alexa for math and science queries.

 History 
Launch preparations began on May 15, 2009, at 7pm CDT and were broadcast live on Justin.tv. The plan was to publicly launch the service a few hours later. There were issues due to extreme load. The service was officially launched on May 18, 2009, receiving mixed reviews. In 2009, Wolfram Alpha advocates pointed to its potential, some even stating that how it determines results is more important than current usefulness.

On February 8, 2012, WolframAlpha Pro was released, offering users additional features for a monthly subscription fee.

 Copyright claims 
InfoWorld published an article warning readers of the potential implications of giving an automated website proprietary rights to the data it generates. Free software advocate Richard Stallman also opposes the idea of recognizing the site as a copyright holder and suspects that Wolfram would not be able to make this case under existing copyright law.