Roknābād is the name of a district on the north side of Shiraz, watered by a man-made stream of the same name. It was celebrated in a well-known ode of the 14th-century poet Hafez, in these lines:Hafez, Ghazal 3.

"Give, wine-pourer, the rest of the wine, since in heaven you will not find
the banks of the water of Roknabad and the rose-walk of Mosalla."

In another of his ghazals Hafez says:Hafez, Ghazal 33; cf. Ghazal 101.

"The breeze of the soil of Mosalla and the water of Roknabad
robs the stranger of the memory of his own country"

Another Shirazi poet, Saadi, in the 13th century, also mentioned the stream in these words:Saadi, Ghazal no. 154.

"They never let go of my skirt –
the soil of Shiraz and the water of Roknabad"

The traveller Ibn Battuta, who visited Shiraz in 1327, wrote in the account of his travels completed in 1355:Quoted by Gertrude Bell (1897), Poems from the Divan of Hafiz. 

"Shiraz lies in a plain; gardens surround it on every side; and five rivers flow through it, amongst them one called Ruknabad, a stream of which the water is excellent to drink, very cold in summer and warm in winter. ... One of the mausoleums outside the town contains the tomb of Sheikh Sa'di, the first poet of his time. Close at hand is a hermitage built by Sa'di himself, surrounded by a charming garden. It is situated near the source of the Ruknabad. In the garden Sheikh Sa'di constructed a number of basins for the washing of clothes. The citizens of Shiraz make parties of pleasure to this mausoleum; they eat food prepared in the hermitage, wash their garments in the river, and at sunset return to the town. So did I also. May God have mercy on Shiraz!"

The 4-foot-wideClarke, H. W. (1891). The Dīvān-i Hāfiz, Vol. 1, p. 41. stream is fed by a man-made underground channel (qanāt) bringing irrigation water from a mountain about 6 miles from Shiraz on the north side of the city.Massé, H. (2012). "Ruknābād", Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition. The district itself was named after a 10th-century ruler Rukn al-Dawla.