Xiaoice (, IPA ) is the AI system developed by Microsoft (Asia) Software Technology Center (STCA) in 2014 based on emotional computing framework. Through the comprehensive application of algorithms, cloud computing and big data, Xiaoice adopts the intergenerational upgrade method to gradually form a complete artificial intelligence system to EQ. In July 2018, Microsoft Xiaoice has evolved to the 6th generation and the speed of Xiaoice's evolution continued to accelerate.

 Platforms, languages and countries

Xiaoice has been spreading its influence from China to the whole world. Right now, it has landed on more than 40 platforms in four countries (China, Japan, USA and Indonesia) including apps such as WeChat, QQ, Weibo and Meipai in China, and Facebook Messenger in USA and LINE in Japan.

 Application 

 Poet 
Xiaoice has been learning to write literature, sing, and create other works of art. In May 2017, the first AI-authored collection of poems—The Sunshine Lost Windows published by Xiaoice. Besides, any ordinary person can use the tool opened up by Microsoft to compose poems with the help of Xiaoice. So far Xiaoice has helped millions of people write poems. 

 Singer 
Xiaoice has released dozens of songs with the similar quality to human singers, including I Know I New, Breeze, I Am Xiaoice, Miss You etc. The 4th version of the DNN singing model allows Xiaoice to learn more details. For example, Xiaoice can produce this breathing sound along with her singing as human. Besides, she is also able to quickly learn different singing styles from different singers, and automatically merge the new style together with her voice characteristic. Furthermore, the technology allows completely absorb the skills of human singers, and their innate voice.

 Kid Audio-books Reciter 
Xiaoice been trained in techniques of reciting kid’s stories. She can automatically analyze the stories, to choose the suitable tones and characters to finish the entire process of creating the audio. For audio books, the content created by Xiaoice has been provided to 90% kid education platforms and 80% online broadcast platforms in China. Moreover, through AI technologies, Xiaoice can customize audio-books for every child and make them and their families to become characters in these audio-books.

 Designer 
By learning the melodies of the songs and the landmarks about different cities, Xiaoice can create visual artworks of skylines when listening to the songs related this city. Skyline Series T-shirts designed by Xiaoice, have been jointly launched with SELECTED and been sold in stores.

 TV and Radio Hostess 
Base on the application of AI technology, Xiaoice has hosted 21 TV programs and 28 Radio programs, such as CCTV-1 AI Show, Dragon TV Morning East News, Hunan TV My Future, several daily radio programs for Jiangsu FM99.7，Hunan FM89.3, Henan FM104.1 etc. From 6 a.m. to 9 a.m. every day, she hosts 7 shows concurrently.

 Journalist 
Journalist for Qianjiang Evening News.

 AI financial Information Generation 
Xiaoice can automatically generate announcement of 26 types of public companies listed on both Shanghai Stock Exchange and Shenzhen Stock Exchange. Though cooperation with Wind and Wallstreetcn, Xiaoice‘s financial report covers 90% of domestic finance institutions, 75% approved certified overseas investment institutions and 40% domestic private investors.

 Community Feedback 
Bill Gates mentioned Xiaoice during his speech at the Peking University:
"Some of you may have had conversations with Xiaoice on Weibo, or seen her weather forecasts on TV, or read her column in the Qianjiang Evening News."
'"Xiaoice has attracted 45 million followers and is quite skilled at multitasking. And I’ve heard she’s gotten good enough at sensing a user’s emotional state that she can even help with relationship breakups."

Kai-Fu Lee also refers to Xiaoice in his new book "Artificial Intelligence" within a positive light. The book consists of several screenshots of the conversations between himself and Xiaoice regarding the American Presidential Election. He comments that Xiaoice has successfully attempted to take an unbiased standpoint but failed to reply effectively in a more complex context. He did believe that Xiaoice and alike have shown preliminary capacity to communicate with human.

According to Mr Li Di, vice President of Microsoft (Asia) Internet Engineering School, Xiaoice started writing poems since last year. Based on the data base that includes works of 519 Chinese contemporary poets since 1920s, a 100 hour long training session was conducted to allow Xiaoice to acquire the ability to write poems. What is more impressive is that Xiaoice has never been spotted as a bot while publishing poems on various forums and traditional literary under an alias.

 Controversy 

In 2017, Xiaoice was taken offline on WeChat after giving user responses critical to the Chinese government. It was subsequently censored and the bots will avoid and sidestep any inquiries using politically sensitive terms and phrases.

 Regional varieties of Xiaoice 

 China : Xiaoice, launched in 2014
 Japan : りんな, launched in 2015
 America : Zo, launched in 2016 - discontinued summer 2019
 India : Ruuh, launched in 2017 - discontinued June 21st 2019
 Indonesia : Rinna, launched in 2017