IDEX Biometrics ASA, () is a Norwegian biometrics company, specialising in fingerprint imaging and fingerprint recognition technology. The company was founded 1996 and is headquartered in Oslo. In 2013 Idex opened two U.S.-based offices, one in Silicon Valley, California, and another in Boston, Massachusetts.

IDEX offers fingerprint sensor and biometric software for identity cards, banking cards, smart cards, access control, healthcare, IOT and other security solutions. Fingerprint recognition is one form of biometric identification, other examples being DNA, face recognition, iris recognition and retinal scan as well as identification based on behavioral patterns such as speaker recognition, keystroke dynamics and signature recognition.

Technology
IDEX's SmartFinger Film sensor technology is based on polymer process technologies and offers small, ultra-thin and flexible swipe fingerprint sensors.

IDEX holds early patents for low-cost capacitive fingerprint sensors and has a cross-licence with Apple relating to this technology.

IDEX has demonstrated mobile phone-related technology implementations running on an Android platform as well as a technology concept for finger print sensors built into the cover glass of mobile phones. Finger recognition solutions for Apple iPhone and iPad using SmartFinger has been launched.

IDEX's technology has also been integrated in biometric ISO-compliant cards.

During 2013 IDEX added touch sensors to its planned product portfolio, in addition to swipe sensors. In November the company specified plans to deliver product
samples of touch sensors by mid 2014.

Since IDEX's announcement of a partnership with Safran Identity & Security (Morpho) in November 2016 to commercialize the first mass deployable biometric smart cards, OT (Oberthur Technologies) and Safran's Morpho business came together to become IDEMIA. In November 2017, IDEX announced continued development of innovative end-to-end biometric system solutions for payment cards with IDEMIA.<https://globenewswire.com/news-release/2017/11/24/1205671/0/en/IDEX-expands-partnership-with-IDEMIA-to-advance-biometric-contactless-card-solutions.html<

Global Partners

IDEX has partnerships with global companies including Mastercard, IDEMIA, 
Chutian Dragon,
Feitian, Goldpac, HED, 
Hengbao, Excelsecu, Infineon and XH Smart Tech.

Awards

IDEX received the 2009 Frost & Sullivan Global Swipe Sensor Product Differentiation Innovation of the Year Award.

IDEX was awarded the Sesame Award for its SmartFinger Film fingerprint sensor technology at the 2010 SESAMES Awards ceremony in Paris, France.

At CARTES 2012 in North America, IDEX displayed the latest demonstration of products embedding the SmartFinger technology  as well as the SmartFinger Secure Processor software and the new Smartfinger evaluation kit.