Matroid is a Computer Vision company that gives typical computer users the ability to scan video. Matroid was founded in 2016 in Palo Alto, California.

 Product 
The Matroid Product is a studio for creating and using detectors that scan video for faces, actions, places, and other objects. Example applications include determining when former President Barack Obama appears on TV or how often a man holding a gun is recorded in security footage. Users can create custom detectors to find specific people or objects, or they can pick from a library of pre-programmed detectors designed by other users of the platform.

Matroid is initially focused on analyzing television appearances and scanning surveillance video. In the first case, a firm may want to track which political candidates got more TV time or which brand of car appears more often on a particular show or television network.

Product features include a video player with computer at its core, a tight feedback loop for detector iteration, an extensive API, stream monitoring, and work-sharing amongst users in a library of public detectors. Microsoft and Google presented at the 2017 Scaled Machine Learning Conference held at Stanford University.

 Scaled Machine Learning Conference 
Matroid holds the Scaled Machine Learning Conference (ScaledML) every year. The previous two conferences were held on the Stanford University campus.

At ScaledML 2016, Microsoft announced "Open Mind", Microsoft's Visual Studio-like suite for machine learning. At the 2017 conference, Google announced the Tensor Processor Unit to speed up machine learning operations in Google Cloud Platform.

 Funding 
Matroid raised $3.5 million in funding from New Enterprise Associates in 2016, and a further $10 million from Intel in 2017.

 Open Source 
Matroid uses TensorFlow and Kubernetes. As an active member of the TensorFlow open-source community, Matroid has held TensorFlow tutorials and is currently writing a book on TensorFlow for Deep Learning with O'Reilly Media. For its contributions to open-source machine learning, Matroid was awarded a best paper award at KDD 2016.