Frederick Douglas, Jr., (March 3, 1842 - Jul 26, 1892) was the second son of Frederick Douglass and his wife Anna Murray Douglass. Born in Bedford, Massachusetts, he was an abolitionist, Essayist, newspaper Editor, and an official recruiter of colored soldiers for the United States Union Army during the American Civil War.

Early Life

Frederick Jr., was the third eldest of five children born to the Douglass family, comprising three sons and two daughters. As a youngster while still under his parent’s roof he joined them as active members and conductors of the Underground railroad, receiving fugitives at their Rochester, New York home; feeding and clothing them, and providing safe, warm shelter as they made their way from bondage to freedom, which for many of these meant escape to Canada. Years later, his brother Charles would recall: “We have often had to get up at midnight to admit a sleigh-load and start fires to thaw them the fugitives out. Every member of the family had to lend a hand to this work and it was always cheerfully performed.” 

Military Service

During the War Between the States, Frederick Jr., joined his father as a recruiter of United States Colored Troops for the Union Army and was commissioned a Recruiting Sergeant. Although he himself was never a combat soldier during the intrastate conflict, as were his two brothers, he was proud to have been a recruiter in behalf of the Union cause, especially in regard to the 55th Massachusetts Infantry RegimentBlight, David W. Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom. Simon and Shuster, 2018. p450. As such, he worked closely with his renowned father who had been the foremost civilian recruiter for the 54th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment, and who had also served as a consultant and advisor to President Abraham Lincoln on the enlistment of men of color into the Union Army, in supporting the Commander in Chief's objective of reinforcing the North’s armed forces to put down the rebellion of the break-away Confederate States.Blight, David W. Frederick Douglass: Prophet of Freedom. Simon and Shuster, 2018. p450 Both his older brother Lewis Henry Douglass and younger brother Charles Remond Douglass were among the first enlistees in that famed regiment. Charles, in fact, was the very first man of color to enlist from the State of New York.
Career
As was true of his world renowned father, as well as his two brothers, Frederick Jr., lived many lives in one. He was both a printer and editor, having learned these skills while working as an apprentice on his father's newspaper The North Star, later known as Frederick Douglass’ Paper.  Tegether with his father and his brother Lewis, he became co-editor to the New Era or New National Era, a journal published specifically for Freedmen post-civil War freed slaves between the years 1870 to 1874. This post abolitionist journal shared with an earlier journal[[The National Era|], also published at Washington D.C. between years 1847 to 1860. It was this paper that had serialized the stories that would become Uncle Tom's cabin, written by Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Like his older brother Lewis, he was also a trained Typesetter, having completed formal training at Denver, Colorado. His younger brother Charles would later become the first typesetter employed by the U.S. Government Printing Office at Washington D.C.
Personal Life
On August 4, 1869, Frederick, Jr., married Virginia Hewlett in Cambridge, Middlesex, Massachusetts. Together they had two sons, Frederick Aaron Douglass and Charles Paul Douglass. When his father, Frederick Douglass, Sr., was appointed United States Marshal by President Ulysses S. Grant in the year 1877, Frederick, Jr., was made a Bailiff and also attained a clerkship in the office of the Recorder of Deeds during his father's tenure as first to serve in that role for the District of Columbia. 
Death
Frederick Douglass Jr., died on July 26, 1892, and was interred at Graceland Cemetery beside his beloved wife Virginia Hewlett who had preceded him in death on December 14, 1889. This later changed when Graceland closed, bodies exhumed and removed to Woodlawn Cemetery in the Benning Ridge section of Washington D.C. 