Moisés Jacob Tu‘u Hereveri (1873–1925) was elected ‘ariki (king) of Rapa Nui (Easter Island) from 1901 until his exile in 1902. He was the last Rapa Nui to claim the traditional kingship. However, he is generally not remembered as the last king instead his predecessor Riro Kāinga is generally regarded as the last, although neither held much power.

Biography
Hereveri was born, of Rapa Nui descent, in 1873 at Haapape, in the Kingdom of Tahiti, now near present-day Point Venus, Mahina, French Polynesia. His family was part of the diaspora community of Rapa Nui which settled in Tahiti. On 6 June 1871, half of the Rapa Nui population, around 277 islanders, followed the Father Hippolyte Roussel and Brother Théodule Escolan, French Catholic missionaries of the Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary to Tahiti and Mangareva after disputes between the missionaries and rancher Jean-Baptiste Dutrou-Bornier. His parents would have been one of the 108 Rapa Nui who followed Brother Escolan and were employed in British businessman John Brander's plantation on Tahiti, or the 67 islanders sent by Dutrou-Bornier to join the workers on October 1871.

Back on Easter Island, the penultimate King Atamu Tekena ceded the island to Chile (represented by Captain Policarpo Toro) on 9 September 1888. However, the treaty of annexation was never ratified by Chile and Toro's colony failed. The Chilean government abandoned the settlement in 1892 due to political troubles on the mainland, which was embroiled in civil war, and this prompted the Rapa Nui to reassert their independence. The Miru clan representative, Siméon Riro Kāinga, was elected the position of ‘Ariki or King of Rapa Nui left vacant by the death of Atamu Tekena in August 1892.

The Rapa Nui unsuccessfully attempted to reclaim indigenous sovereignty in the absence of direct Chilean control from 1892 to 1896. However, Chile reasserted its claim, and the island was later leased to Enrique Merlet and his ranching company. They restricted the islanders' access to most of their land except a walled-off settlement at Hanga Roa, which they were not allowed to leave without permission. The young king attempted to protest the company's abuse but died under suspicious circumstances at Valparaíso.

Riro Kāinga has been generally referred to as the last king of Easter Island. However, two other candidates for the kingship existed after him. Enrique Ika was proclaimed king in January 1900. Moisés Tuʻu Hereveri was elected king in 1901. He was ousted in the following year in 1902 and exiled to the mainland. In 1914, the Riro's cousin Angata, another member of the Miru clan, led an unsuccessful rebellion against the ranching company which was crushed when the Chilean navy arrested the ringleaders of the revolt.

Hereveri died in 1925. Rapa Nui historian Cristián Moreno Pakarati noted that Enrique Ika and Moisés Tu‘u Hereveri have been unjustly forgotten by Rapa Nui historiography.

Riro Kāinga's grandson, Valentino Riroroko Tuki, declared himself king of Rapa Nui in 2011.