 

The Apple Watch Series 3 is the fourth-generation model of the Apple Watch. This device was released on September 22, 2017, continuing Apple's yearly release cycle. As of September 2020, Apple Watch Series 3 with Wi-Fi and GPS can be purchased for $199. The addition of cellular connectivity is no longer available. 

Apple used advertising points to emphasize the need for this product to track fitness goals. The "3 Ring Goal" for tracking the users fitness level while the device is being used has been improved for accuracy and workout plans. Apple Watch Series 3 added cellular connectivity for the first time in an Apple Watch. The four major US carriers (AT&T, Sprint Wireless, T-Mobile, and Verizon Wireless) all support Apple Watch Series 3 and use the same mobile number as the user's iPhone.

 Features 
The Apple Watch Series 3 featured LTE cellular connectivity for the first time in an Apple Watch, enabling users to make phone calls, iMessage and stream Apple Music and podcasts directly on the watch when their iPhone is not nearby. The watch comes with an electronic SIM card and shares the same mobile number as the user's iPhone. Add-on plans start at $10/month from the four major US carriers.

Hardware
Apple Watch Series 3 has a dual-core Apple S3 processor that is 70% faster than the Apple S2 and enables Siri voice responses. It features a Bluetooth 4.2 vs the 4.0 on older models allowing for a faster and stronger connection to the paired device. The cellular-capable watch has a red digital crown while the non-LTE version has a plain digital crown. It has a built-in NFC chip which can be used for Apple Pay. Apple claims 18 hours of battery life. Each model of the Series 3 comes in a 38- or 42-millimeter body, with the larger size having a slightly larger screen and battery. It also includes ISO 22810:2010 water resistance (up to 50 meters) from the Apple Watch Series 2."Review: The absolutely optional Apple Watch and Watch OS 1.0". Ars Technica. Retrieved July 15, 2015.

 Software 
As of September 2020, The Apple Watch Series 3 ships with watchOS 7, which has a new Sleep app (enabling built-in sleep tracking), Watch Face sharing (to share specific faces with specific complications with others), as well as new workout options (Dance, Functional Strength Training, Core Training and Cooldown)

 Requirements 
Compatibility depends on the version of watchOS shipped on the device. As of September 2020, the Apple Watch Series 3 ships with watchOS 7 and officially requires an iPhone 6S or later with iOS 14 or later.