Presentation of $10 million check for Ansari X Prize 
This list of challenge awards is an index to articles about challenge awards, or inducement prize contests.
A cash prize is given for the accomplishment of a feat, usually of engineering.

Offered before 1900

Country  Award  Sponsor  Description France  Alkali prize  Louis XVI of France, French Academy of Sciences  Offered in 1783 for a method to produce alkali from sea salt (sodium chloride). Achieved by Nicolas Leblanc in 1791.

Offered in 20th century

Country  Award  Sponsor  Description United States  Ansari X Prize  X Prize Foundation  Offered in 1996 for first non-government organization to launch a reusable manned spacecraft into space twice within two weeks. Won in 2004. United Kingdom  Daily Mail aviation prizes  Daily Mail newspaper  Offered between 1906 and 1930 for various different achievements in aviation France  Deutsch prize  Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe  Offered in 1900 for first machine capable of flying a round trip from the Parc Saint Cloud to the Eiffel Tower in Paris and back in less than thirty minutes.Airship Deutsch Prize - 1901, The Airship Z-Prize official website  Won in 1901. United States  Dole Air Race  James Dole  1927 air race across the Pacific Ocean from northern California to the Territory of Hawaii. Two of the eight planes successfully landed in Hawaii. Hungary  Erdős problems  Paul Erdős  20th century. Payments for solutions to unresolved mathematical problems France  Grand Prix d'Aviation  Henri Deutsch de la Meurthe  Offered in 1904 for the first person to fly a circular 1-kilometer course in a heavier-than-air craft. Won in 1908HENRI FARMAN 1874-1958 at Early Aviators.comHenri Farman at Centennial of Flight 

Offered in 21st century

Country  Award  Sponsor  Description United States  America's Space Prize  Robert Bigelow  Offered in 2004 for first US-based team to design and build a reusable manned capsule capable of flying 5 astronauts to a Bigelow Aerospace inflatable space module. Expired in 2010 without a winner. United States  Archon X Prize  X Prize Foundation  Offered in 2006 for the first team to rapidly, accurately and economically sequence 100 whole human genomes to an unprecedented level of accuracy. Cancelled in 2013. United States  Automotive X Prize  X Prize Foundation  Offered in 2007 for super-efficient low-emission vehicles in three categories. Awarded in 2010 United States  Buckminster Fuller Challenge  Buckminster Fuller Institute  Annual international design competition for the most comprehensive solution to a pressing global problem. United States  Centennial Challenges  NASA  Offered since 2003 for various non-government-funded technological achievements by American teams. United States  Cornell Cup USA  Cornell University  Offered since 2011, annual embedded design competition to empower student teams to become the inventors of the newest innovative applications of embedded technology United States  DARPA Network Challenge  DARPA  2009 contest to use social networking to locate ten red balloons placed around the United States. Won in less than 9 hours. United States  DARPA Shredder Challenge 2011  DARPA   2011 contest to reconstruct documents shredded by a variety of paper shredding techniques.  United States  DARPA Spectrum Challenge  DARPA  2013 contest for a radio protocol that can best use a given communication channel in the presence of other dynamic users and interfering signals. United States  Elevator:2010  Spaceward Foundation, NASA Centennial Challenges  2005–2010 contests for space elevator and  related technologies. Annual competitions for climbers, ribbons and power-beaming systems

Miscellaneous

Country  Award  Sponsor  Description  Feynman Prize in Nanotechnology  Food preservation prize  Google Lunar X Prize  Harsen Prize  Hearst Transcontinental Prize  Hutter Prize  Hyperloop pod competition  Inducement prize contest  Knuth reward check  L Prize  Longitude Act  Longitude Prize  Longitude rewards  Lunar Lander Challenge  Milan Committee Prize  Millennium Prize Problems  N-Prize  Orteig Prize  Prize4Life  Space elevator competitions  Space Poop Challenge  Tricorder X Prize  UAV Outback Challenge  Virgin Earth Challenge  Wendy Schmidt Oil Cleanup X Challenge  X Prize Cup