Abraham H. Albertson was one of Seattle, Washington's most prominent architects of the first half of the 20th century. He was born in New Jersey and educated at Columbia University in New York. Early in his career, he moved to Seattle in the employ of a well-know New York architectural firm with that was developing a large area in downtown. He was associated with many projects in Seattle from around 1910 through the 20s and early 30s. Some of his designs are Seattle landmarks and/or listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

Early life
Albertson was born April 14, 1872 in Hope, New Jersey to New Jersey natives Edward H. Albertson, a grocer, and Victoria Newman Albertson. In 1880, he was living in Hackettstown and subsequently lived in New York City for ten years including time attending Columbia University. He served in Cuba during the Spanish-American War as a corporal in the U.S. Army and New York State National Guard with. He saw service with under Col. Theodore Roosevelt at the Battle of San Juan Hill and the Siege of Santiago. After the war, he returned to complete his education and graduated, with scholarship assistance, from the Columbia School of Architecture with a Ph.B in 1895. 

Career
He worked in New York City for the architectural firm Clinton and Russell, being one of its earliest employees after it opened in 1894 when he started as a draftsman. He moved to Duluth, Minnesota in 1905 and then to Seattle in 1907 as the local representative of the New York City Howells and Stokes until it dissolved in 1917. He was joined in the Seattle office by Joseph W. Wilson and Paul D. Richardson, who became his future partners.

He remained in Seattle and was a partner or principal in several firms - Howells and Albertson (1920-28) (which succeeded the local office of Howells and Stokes after that firm closed); Albertson and Associates (1920-1933), and Albertson, Wilson, and Richardson (1935-1937), which had little work due to the Great Depression. His final position was with the federal government, as chief architect of the Washington State office of the Federal Housing Authority from 1939 until his retirement in 1949.

Projects
He was the local representative of Howells and Stokes who was hired to plan the redevelopment of the original downtown Seattle site of the the University of Washington. The Metropolitan Tract was, at the time, the largest development of a downtown site undertaken in the United States. Albertson also supervised other work of Howells and Stokes in the west, including San Francisco's Royal Insurance Building. After the demise of Howells and Stokes, Albertson (with Wilson and Richardson) continued on to complete most of the remaining buildings in the Metropolitan Tract.

He also developed a significant modification to the waterfront for a new Seattle Railroad and Marine Terminal, but the project was abandoned due to more pressing needs of World War I.

Albertson supervised the construction of the White-Henry-Stuart Building (1923), Cobb Building, Stimson Building (1925) and the Metropolitan Theatre.

World War I brought Albertson government work including the Navy Yard Hotel in Bremerton, and various apartments, houses, and schools.

Some of his best known designs include the Northern Life Tower built in (1927-29), the downtown YMCA (1929-31), St. Joseph’s Church and Cornish School (1920-21), the Mrs. Grant Smith residence at 619 W. Comstock Street (a designated Seattle landmark, now the Stuart/Balcom House), St. Anne’s Convent (1930), and an addition to the former Children’s Orthopedic Hospital.

The architectural styles producted by Albertson varied greatly, including Spanish Revival, Art Deco, and Collegiate Gothic.

Other
He became a member of the American Institute of Architects in 1910 and was once the national director. He was a chairman Seattle's building code committee, wrote the Seattle Tenement House Law, and was a director of the Seattle Social Welfare League, chairman of the Bi-state Federal Historical Monuments Survey, vice-chairman of the Washington State Emergency Public Works Board among other public positions.

Seattle's University Street station contains a staircase with quotations inscribed on the risers from Albertson describing the Cobb Tower, served by the station and located just across University Street.

Personal
Albertson married Claire D. Fox, who was born in Illinois , in Kitsap County, Washington in 1915. After her death in 1946, Albertson married Elizabeth G. Henry in Seattle. Abertson died April 18, 1964 in Seattle after a short illness.

Notable projects

The following buildings are listed on the National Register of Historic Places:
Everett City Hall, 3002 Wetmore Ave. Everett
Stuart/Balcom House, 619 W. Comstock St. Seattle
Vancouver Telephone Building, 112 W. Eleventh Vancouver
Women's University Club of Seattle, 1105 6th Ave. Seattle
Medical Dental Building (Seattle), 509 Olive Way Seattle
Northern Life Tower, 1218 Third Avenue, Seattle
St. Joseph’s Church and Cornish School, 70 E. Roy St. Seattle
Monte Cristo Hotel, Everett (consulting engineer)
Cobb Building (supervised construction)
Royal Insurance Building, San Francisco (supervised construction)