The Yager's OWA (ordered weighted averaging) operators are used to aggregate the crisp values in decision making schemes (such as multi-criteria decision making, multi-expert decision making and  multi-criteria/multi-expert decision making). It is widely accepted that Fuzzy sets are more suitable for representing preferences of criteria in decision making.

The type-1 OWA operators have been proposed for this purpose. The type-1 OWA operators provides a technique for directly aggregating uncertain information with uncertain weights via OWA mechanism in soft decision making and data mining, where these uncertain objects are modelled by fuzzy sets.

The two definitions for type-1 OWA operators are based on Zadeh's Extension Principle and -cuts of fuzzy sets. The two definitions lead to equivalent results.

Definitions

Definition 1
Let  be the set of fuzzy sets with domain of discourse , a type-1 OWA operator is defined as follows:

Given n linguistic weights  in the form of fuzzy sets defined on the domain of discourse , a type-1 OWA operator is a mapping, ,

such that

where ,and  is a permutation function such that , i.e.,  is the th highest element in the set .

Definition 2
Using the alpha-cuts of fuzzy sets:

Given the n linguistic weights  in the form of fuzzy sets defined on the domain of discourse , then for each , an -level type-1 OWA operator with -level sets  to aggregate the -cuts of fuzzy sets  is:

 

where  , and  is a permutation function such that , i.e.,  is the th largest
element in the set .

 Representation theorem of Type-1 OWA operators

Given the n linguistic weights  in the form of fuzzy sets defined on the domain of discourse , and the fuzzy sets , then we have that

where  is the aggregation result obtained by Definition 1, and  is the result obtained by in Definition 2.

Programming problems for Type-1 OWA operators

According to the Representation Theorem of Type-1 OWA Operators, a general type-1 OWA operator can be decomposed into a series of -level type-1 OWA operators. In practice, this series of  -level type-1 OWA operators is used to construct the resulting aggregation fuzzy set. So we only need to compute the left end-points and right end-points of the intervals . Then, the resulting aggregation fuzzy set is constructed with the membership function as follows:

For the left end-points, we need to solve the following programming problem:

while for the right end-points, we need to solve the following programming problem:

A fast method has been presented to solve two programming problem so that the type-1 OWA aggregation operation can be performed efficiently, for details, please see the paper.

Alpha-level approach to Type-1 OWA operation

Three-step process:
 Step 1—To set up the - level resolution in [0, 1].
 Step 2—For each ,
Step 2.1—To calculate 
 Let ;
 If , stop,  is the solution; otherwise go to Step 2.1-3.
 , go to Step 2.1-2.

Step 2.2 To calculate
 Let ;
 If , stop,  is the solution; otherwise go to Step 2.2-3.
, go to step Step 2.2-2.

 Step 3—To construct the aggregation resulting fuzzy set  based on all the available intervals :

Special cases
 Any OWA operators, like maximum, minimum, mean operators;
 Join operators of (type-1) fuzzy sets, i.e., fuzzy maximum operators;
 Meet operators of (type-1) fuzzy sets, i.e., fuzzy minimum operators;
 Join-like operators of (type-1) fuzzy sets;
 Meet-like operators of (type-1) fuzzy sets.

Generalizations
Type-2 OWA operators have been suggested to aggregate the type-2 fuzzy sets for soft decision making.