Sougwen Chung (鍾愫君) is a Chinese-born, Canadian-raised artist residing in New York City. Chung's critical practices are based on performance, drawing, still image, sculpture and installation. Chung's work investigates mark-made-by machine and mark-made-by-hand for understanding the encounter of computers and humans.

Early life
Chung grew up in Toronto, Canada, and Hong Kong (where her parents are from). Her father, an opera singer, made sure that his children had instruments in their hands at a very young age, and Chung grew up playing violin and piano. She moved to the States as a teenager and received her BFA from Indiana University before obtaining her Masters Diploma in Interactive Art from Hyper Island in Sweden.

Career
Chung's work has been shown at galleries and museums across the world, including MAMCO in Geneva, Switzerland and Istanbul's Akbank Sanat. Chung has spoken globally at conferences including Tribeca Film, New York; The Hospital Club, London; MUTEK Festival, Montreal & Mexico City; Sonar Festival, Barcelona. The Art Directors Club, New York; Stockholm; SXSW, Austin; Tokyo; Internet Dargana, Barcelona: FITC; New York; OFFF, Barcelona; Gray Area Festival, San Francisco. Her work has also been featured in multiple international press outlets including The New Yorker, Art F City, Dazed and Confused, The Creators Project, MASHABLE, Engadget, Business Insider, Fast Company and USA Today.

Chung is a former researcher at MIT's Media Lab and an inaugural member of NEW INC, the first museum-led technology and art in collaboration with The New Museum. According to the World Science Festival 2018, she is an Artist-In-Residence at Bell Labs exploring new forms of drawing in virtual reality, with biometrics, machine learning, and robotics.

An example of her work is the 2017 “Drawing Operations Unit.” It is an exploration into the machine learning the drawing style of the artists hand. The robotic arm's behavior is generated from neural nets trained on the artist's drawing gestures. In a sense, the robotic arm has learned from the visual style of the artists previous drawings and outputs a machine interpretation during the human / robot drawing duet.

Selected Works
Drawing Operations Unit: Generation 2 (Memory) (2017) — Performance involving robotic memory.
Drawing Operations Unit: Generation 1 (Mimicry) (2015) — An ongoing collaboration between an artist and a robotic arm.
Embryo (Étude OP. 5, No. 5) (2015) — Mixed media, commissioned by OFFF for OFFF Unmasked.
Praesentia (2015) — "As a pencil moves about the paper, its path is local and confined; freed from the need to consider the totality, it can respond immediately to “where the hand is now in praesentia.".
Praesentia Sculptures (2013) — 3D printed drawn sculptural prototypes printed in gold, made with custom software. Exhibited at the MIT Media Lab 2013. Currently, they are prototypes for a forthcoming series examining dimensional mark making.

Selected Press
2017 Wong, Mimi. “Edges of Transition.” Art Asia Pacific, July 2017, pp. 38–39.
2015 Saini, Shivam. “This Robotic Arm Draws Almost as Well as a Human Artist - Because It Sort of Is One.” Business Insider, Business Insider, 29 July 2015
2015 New Hive: Interview with Maddy Varner 
2015 Redbull Studios: NEW INC Showcase: Sougwen Chung (video)
2015 Sinovision: Sougwen Chung and her Drawing Robot D.O.U.G. (video)
2015 ArtFagCity: A Cheery Future for Art and Tech
2015 NY1: Art and Technology Meet at Redbull Studios New York (video)
2015 The Observer: The New Museum Unveils Projects Born of its Mod ‘New Inc.’
2015 Creators Project: High Tech Art Toys and Experiences Emerge at NEW INC
2014 Dazed Visionaries: Sougwen Chung, Dazed & Confused Magazine
2014 Debut States Of Independence Visionary, Dazed & Confused Magazine
2014 Print Magazine, Top 20 New Visual Artists Under 30
2012 Cool Hunting: Sougwen Chung
2012 Booooooom / Drawings by Sougwen Chung
2012 Creators Project / Featured Works From the Gallery
2012 Mixmag / Bass Mutations at Unsound Festival
2012 Create Digital Motion / Alien, Organic Beauty of Sepalcure Visuals, by Sougwen
2011 The New Yorker / The Screening Process
2011 The Fox Is Black / The Complex and Ornate Drawings of Sougwen Chung
2011 Dazed and Confused Magazine / RISE: Sougwen Chung
2011 Ghostly International / Formless and Definitely in the Future: The Work of Sougwen Chung
2010 Create Digital Motion / Visuals for Shigeto Full Circle, and Reflections on Drawing by Hand
2010 Eyebeam / Visual Music Collaborative