Michael Biton is an Israeli politician, serving as mayor of Yeruham. He was born and raised in the town. 
His parents are immigrants from Morocco. He has an M.A. in Organizational Leadership from Hebrew University of Jerusalem, a B.A. in Behavioral Studies and Hebrew Literature from Ben-Gurion University of the Negev. He also studied English at Yale University and worked as an Au Pair in the US. Formerly a member of Kadima, and Labor. Biton has been the Mayor of Yeruham since his victory in November 2010. He has worked with Adina Bar-Shalom to form a new political party called Achi Yisraeli to run in the Next Israeli legislative election. Since becoming mayor, Biton has been credited with Yeruham's turn around from a corrupt government to an up and coming city.  He left Achi Yisraeli due to a leadership dispute with Bar-Shalom. Biton is currently a member of the Knesset with the Israel Resilience Party as part of the Blue and White list.

Before his political career he was an officer in the Israeli Defense Force and featured in the documentary "To Be An Officer". After his studies he was head of Yeruham's local community center, managed the Jewish Agency's Be'er Seva District, and founded the nonprofit Youth of Yeruham.

Biton is considered a rising star in Israeli Politics who has spoken at the J Street conference and met with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas. He won his first election to lead Yeruham's town council by around 45% in 2010, but one his re-election in 2014 by nearly 70%.

He is a well-known leader in the fight against income inequality and is a leader in the national "Equality March" which started in Yeruham. 

In 2014 he signed a landmark agreement to transfer the Camp Ariel Sharon training complex from the jurisdiction of the Ramat Negev Regional Council to that of Yeruham.

He came in 2nd in the election to be the head of the Israeli branch of the Jewish National Fund. 238 votes behind the victor, Labor MK Dani Atar, but 112 votes ahead of the incumbent, Efi Stenzler.