Tales from the Loop is an alternate history science fiction tabletop role-playing game designed by Nils Hintze and is based on the art of Simon Stålenhag. It was published in 2017 by Free League Publishing, the international arm of Swedish game and book publisher Fria Ligan AB, and Modiphius Entertainment. The game is built upon the Year Zero Engine created by Tomas Härenstam, who also served as the editor and project manager.

The role-playing game was created from a Kickstarter campaign by Fria Ligan AB, who surpassed their crowdfunding goal and raised a total of 3,745,896 kr from 5,600 backers.

Play overview

 Background 
Tales from the Loop has two settings available from the rulebook. The first setting is an alternate version of the Mälaren Islands, west of the Swedish capital of Stockholm. The second included setting, which was created from reaching a stretch goal on the Kickstarter, is in a city based on Boulder City, Nevada. There is a step-by-step guide for players to put their own hometowns into the game, which was included due to a stretch goal on Kickstarter being met. The chapter, called "Hometown Hack", appears in a supplementary book, Tales from the Loop: Our Friends The Machines & Other Mysteries.

In Tales from the Loop, a story that the players play through is called a Mystery. The players play as the Kids, a group of friends, aged 10-15, living in the late 1980s. In the Mysteries, the Kids encounter machines and creatures that have come to exist because of the Loop, a huge underground particle accelerator built in the late 1960s.

 Game mechanics 
Tales from the Loop runs on 6 main principles that are meant to help the Gamemaster and players create the intended feeling and plot of the Mystery:

 Your Hometown is Full of Strange and Fantastic Things
 Everyday Life is Dull and Unforgiving
 Adults are Out of Reach and Out of Touch
 The Land of the Loop is Dangerous but The Kids Will Not Die
 The Game is Played Scene by Scene
 The World is Described Collaboratively

The Kids are characters created by the players. The game offers many options for the player to choose from, but the main categorization for a Kid is based on their Type, similar to how Classes work in Dungeons & Dragons. The types introduced in the game are:

 Bookworm
 Computer Geek
 Hick
 Jock
 Popular Kid
 Rocker
 Troublemaker
 Weirdo