 is a original net animation series produced by Sunrise Beyond. A sequel to the 2018 anime Gundam Build Divers, it's the first Gundam series to be released in the Reiwa period, released to celebrate the franchise's 40th anniversary. The series is directed by Shinya Watada and written by Yasuyuki Muto. Initially announced at the Gundam 40th anniversary video, the series aired on its Gundam Channel streaming service in Japan from October 10 to December 26, 2019. A TV airing of the ONA began on Tokyo MX and later in BS11 on October 12, 2019 as part of the Anime+ lineup.  A second season is set to premiere in April 2020. Two spinoffs of the series were later serialized in Kadokawa's Gundam Ace magazine and Hobby Japan.

Plot
Two years has passed since the EL-Diver Incident, an event that almost destroyed the Gundam Battle Nexus Online Game until being resolved by the force group known as "Build Divers". In order to make the game secure, a newer version of the game was rolled out in order to prevent the same incident from happening again and with newer experiences that would make the gameplay more immersive to players. The story focuses on Hiroto Kuga, a high schooler who is a rogue mercenary diver for hire, who goes in the game being hired by other forces and divers without being affiliated with other forces. Despite his solo diver status and always wanders alone in game, he yearns for one day that he can find the childhood friend that he once befriended several years ago. But after a special request mission, Hiroto was united with other active divers in a strange world named "Eldora" and formed the Force group "BUILD DiVERS" in what appears to be just another GBN gamespace event, until they learn the truth about Eldora and its consequences not only for GBN, but for the entire world.

Characters
BUILD DiVERS
 / 

The main protagonist of the series, a teenage build diver and a former member of the Diver Group Avalon, now known as a rogue diver for hire that wanders the GBN gamespace in search of a mysterious girl he befriended two years ago. He is very calm and a man of few words, usually refusing on other's reward and help, especially on joining other forces. But when a special mission done by Freddie united him with Kazami, May and Parviz, they accidentally formed the force group named "BUILD DiVERS" in hopes their success could lead Hiroto in finding the girl he's been looking for.

Hiroto uses the PFF-X7 Core Gundam as his main Gunpla, based on the RX-78-2 Gundam from the original Mobile Suit Gundam series. Its special armament system called "Planets System", allows the Core Gundam to be equipped with various types of armor, each for a different situation:
Earth Armor (PFF-X7/E3 Earthree Gundam): Core Gundam's default, blueish all-around armor.
Mars Armor (PFF-X7/M4 MarsFour Gundam): A red armor whose focus is close quarters combat.
Venus Armor (PFF-X7/V2 VeeTwo Gundam): A green armor whose focus is ranged combat.
Mercury Armor (PFF-X7/M1 MercuOne Gundam): A dark blue armor whose focus is underwater combat.
Jupiter Armor (PFF-X7/J5 Jupitive Gundam): A white armor whose focus is space combat.

 / 

A diver who was once a former member of the diver group "Mu Dish". He is a very energetic diver who fancies himself as a hero and seeks to make a name for himself in GBN. Though he enjoys the game, he also has been a long fan of the G-TUBER Captain Zeon on his success in several battles, but this obsession drove his former teammates to losing and soon left the group. Only that time he met Hiroto and the others to form the new BUILD DiVERS group to prove his sense of justice. In real life, Kazami is a teenager with a scrawny body.

Kazami uses ZGMF-X19AK Gundam Justice Knight as his main Gunpla, which is a ZGMF-X19A Infinite Justice from Gundam Seed Destiny customized with knight motif and limited armament. He also possesses a modified Petit'gguy called the Justi'gguy.

A female Diver who prefers to play solo, she is very calm and no-nonsense girl whose interest is only in battles alone. However, she wasn't a fan on those that has clashing their opponents head on and prefer to implement strategic approach. Later in the series, she is revealed to be one of the 87 EL-Divers who were saved after the EL-Diver incident two years ago and was given her own Mobile Doll body similar to Sarah.

May uses the WoDom Pod as her main Gunpla, which is a customized JMA-0530 Walking Dome from Turn-A Gundam. In the later episodes, the mobile suit is revealed to be a disguise for its true form, the Mobile Doll May.

 / 

The younger sibling of Ruck Arge aka Shahryar and also a novice diver, whose avatar has fox-like features. He usually take on playing the game after an advice from his older brother, but due to his shy and often timid personality, he had problems having friends. In real life, Patrick is a wheelchair-bound teenager and is also a foreigner from a wealthy Middle Eastern family, just like his brother.

Parviz uses the Valkylander as his main Gunpla, a customized Super Deformed GNY-001F Gundam Astraea Type-F with elements from the Gundlander series in which first appears as a dragon and can transform into its SD Mobile Suit form when in battle.

GBN Divers

A returning character from Gundam Build Divers. He is flamboyant veteran diver and leader of "Adam's Apple". He serves as bartender in the GBN gamespace. He was later revealed as May's caretaker.

A Famous G-Tuber and a veteran diver, who hosts his own show. Shown to be dressed in a red superhero outfit, he has a huge sense of justice and enthusiasm, which inspires Kazami to be his fan.
Captain Zeon uses the RX-93N04 ν-Zeon Gundam as his Main Gunpla, created as a fusion of both Earth Federation and Zeon design and focuses on both Close to Mid-Range combat.

People of Eldora

A preteen anthromorphized dog boy who lived on Planet Eldora. He is very cheerful and shows a lot of respect to the BUiLD DIVERS, often calling them as Creators.

An adult anthromorphized cat girl who lives on Eldora. She is the older sister of Freddie, who is very vary about the BUiLD DIVERS's appearance in their village. Usually has a strong sense of justice yet doesn't get along with Kazami at times.

Maya's childhood friend. Stola wants to join the Eldora Resistance against the One-Eyes.

,  and 

Three Eldoran children in the mountain village, who were close friends with Freddie.

Freddie's father and the mayor of Eldora.

Freddie and Maya's elder brother, and the leader of the Eldora Reisistance.

One-Eyes
 /  / 

A masked diver who sided with the . Though he is surrounded in mystery, May recognized him as such. In real life, Masaki is bed-ridden at the city's general hospital after falling into a coma while logged in to GBN half a year prior to the events of the series.
Masaki uses the MSF-007SS Gundam Seltsam, a heavily customized MSF-007 Gundam Mark-III with unique customization and modelling yet also displays demonic strength.

A mysterious entity residing in Eldora's moon.

Others

A mysterious blonde girl who made friends with Hiroto two years ago before the events of the story. Since her disappearance, Hiroto is been searching for her throughout the game. It is later revealed that she is one of the 87 EL-Divers that appeared in the game 2 years ago. However, she was deleted during the battle between the original Build Divers and the second Coalition of Volunteers when GBN was updated.

Hiroto's classmate and childhood friend who works at the same Gundam Base where he logs into GBN. She apparently has feelings for him.

Hiroto's father, who is a freelance writer. During the series, he suffers from writer's block and constantly forces himself to come up with stories by locking himself in his room.

Hiroto's mother.

Manager of The Gundam Base. Ken is a fan of Henken Bekkener from Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam, to the point of sporting the character's mustache.

Masaki's elder sister, who takes care of him in the hospital.

Production
The series was first teased back in the Gundam 40th Anniversary Beyond Press conference back on November 11, 2018. On July 5, 2019, Sunrise teased the new series in a preview during the 40th anniversary promotional video. Both Twitter and official websites confirm the new series. In the official press conference held on July 31, 2019, Sunrise revealed more on the series's characters and mobile suits alongside the series's staff. It is the first Gundam series produced by Sunrise Beyond, an animation studio established after Xebec's closure in March 2019.

Media
Anime
The series aired on Sunrise's premiere Gundam Channel streaming service from October 10 to December 26, 2019, with Sunrise announcing a simulcast streaming in YouTube and other platforms following with a TV airing in BS11 on October 12, 2019. Spira Spica performed the series' opening theme song "Re:RISE," while SudannaYuzuYully performed the series' ending theme song "Magic Time." The series's music is composed by Hidemura Kimura. A second season will premiere in April 2020.

 No. Title Original air date

Manga
A spinoff manga titled  began serialization in Kadokawa Shoten's monthly Gundam Ace Magazine in December 2019. Ryōji Sekinishi and Shiitake Gensui return to write and illustrate the spinoff manga series with Takayuki Yanase providing the mecha designs.

Merchandise
Part of the series's merchandise was released under Bandai's long running Gunpla line of scale models and sub-collectible line such as Robot Spirits figures.